Happy Hooligan - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Happy Hooligan From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to: navigation, search Happy Hooligan Hooligan as he appeared in a 1902 strip Author(s) Frederick Burr Opper Current status / schedule Ended Launch date March 11, 1900 End date August 14, 1932 Syndicate(s) New York American/King Features Syndicate Genre(s) Humor Happy Hooligan was a popular and influential early American comic strip, the first major strip by the already celebrated cartoonist Frederick Burr Opper. It debuted with a Sunday strip on March 11, 1900 in the William Randolph Hearst newspapers, and was one of the first popular comics with King Features Syndicate.[1] Contents 1 Characters and story 2 Books 3 Sam's Strip 4 References 5 External links Characters and story[edit] The strip told the adventures of a well-meaning hobo who encountered a lot of misfortune and bad luck, partly because of his looks and his low position in society, but who did not lose his smile over it.[2] He was contrasted by his two brothers, the sour Gloomy Gus and the snobbish Montmorency, both just as poor as Happy. Montmorency wore a top hat and monocle but was otherwise as ragged as his siblings. Like the other major comics by Opper, And Her Name Was Maud and Alphonse and Gaston, Happy Hooligan initially did not run on a regular schedule, skipping Sundays from time to time, while some other weeks two pages appeared at once; the character also played a role in some of Opper's daily strips. After a few years, though, Happy Hooligan became a regular feature with both daily strips and Sunday pages. Books[edit] Theater ribbon for play based on the comic strip Frederick Opper's Happy Hooligan (April 9, 1905) Opper was one of the most popular comic creators of his time.[3] Happy Hooligan and his other popular strips were collected in book form and developed into merchandise products.[4][5] The comic got translated as well and was, together with the Katzenjammer Kids and And Her Name Was Maud, one of the first North American comics to be published in Argentina, as Cocoliche.[6] [7][8] The comic was also probably the very first American comic strip adapted for films, when J. Stuart Blackton directed six live-action shorts (1900–02).[9] Some 15 years later, it was adapted for more than 50 animated cartoons. Beginning in 1904, Opper drew And Her Name Was Maud, about the kicking mule Maud, into comic strips and books, but on May 23, 1926, he positioned And Her Name Was Maud as the topper to his Happy Hooligan, and it ran along with Happy Hooligan until both strips came to a conclusion on October 14, 1932. As Opper did not use an assistant, the series ended in 1932 when Opper abandoned it due to failing eyesight.[2] While lacking lasting popularity, the series remained influential and inspired other cartoonists such as Rube Goldberg and Jules Feiffer(who compared the title character to President Gerald Ford) and was also arguably a major inspiration for Charlie Chaplin's The Tramp character.[10] It was called "Opper's greatest comic character" by comics artist Coulton Waugh.[11]Happy Hooligan is also cited as the first comic to use speech balloons on a regular basis as an integral part of the comic (The Yellow Kid used speech balloons as early as 1896 but did not use them as the main means of communication).[12] Sam's Strip[edit] In the early 1960s, Happy Hooligan was a semi-regular character in Sam's Strip; dozens of other comic-strip characters had appeared as "guests" in the strip, but Hooligan appeared so often that he was eventually treated as a regular member of the cast.[13] References[edit] Frederick Opper's Happy Hooligan (October 23, 1921) ^ Ohio History Central (2005). "Frederick Burr Opper". Ohio Historical Society. Retrieved 2007-02-16.  ^ a b Cartoon America: a Library of Congress Exhibition. "Happy Hooligan Makes a Grand Hit!". Retrieved 2007-02-16.  ^ King Features Syndicate. "Hearst's Comics Increase Sales". Retrieved 2007-02-16.  ^ Time (1946-05-27). "Happy Khuligan". Retrieved 2007-02-16.  ^ Joseph F. D'Angelo, President, King Features Syndicate. "William Randolph Hearst and the Comics". Retrieved 2007-02-16.  CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list (link) ^ "Pursuit Of Happiness - Happiness Tips". Retrieved 14 March 2012.  ^ "Happiness". Retrieved 14 March 2012.  ^ "LA BIBLIOTECA revisra fundada por Paul Groussac El presente como historia 2001-2011". Retrieved 11 April 2014.  ^ Don Markstein. "Happy Hooligan". Retrieved 2007-02-16.  ^ Time (1971-12-13). "The Comics on the Couch". Retrieved 2007-02-24. "There was a connection between Happy Hooligan and Chaplin," says Italian Director Federico Fellini.  ^ Ohio State University. "Frederick Burr Opper". Ohio Cartoonists: Exhibition. Retrieved 2007-02-16.  ^ Pascal Lefèvre (July 2006). "The Battle over the Balloon". Image & Narrative: Online Magazine of the Visual Narrative. Archived from the original on 2007-02-11. Retrieved 2007-02-16.  ^ Sam's Strip at ComicsWorthReading.com Everything not directly referenced in the text can be sourced to the Toonopedia entry for Happy Hooligan. External links[edit] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Happy Hooligan. IMDb entry Toonopedia Comiclopedia: Opper Happy Hooligan Dance and Two Step (sheet music) v t e King Features Syndicate comics Current The Amazing Spider-Man Baby Blues Barney Google and Snuffy Smith Beetle Bailey Between Friends Bizarro Bleeker: The Rechargeable Dog Blondie The Brilliant Mind of Edison Lee Buckles Crankshaft Curtis Deflocked Dennis the Menace Dustin The Family Circus Flash Gordon Funky Winkerbean Gil Hägar the Horrible Hazel Henry Hi and Lois Judge Parker The Katzenjammer Kids Laff-a-Day The Lockhorns Mallard Fillmore Mandrake the Magician Mark Trail Marvin Mary Worth Mother Goose and Grimm Mutts On the Fastrack The Pajama Diaries The Phantom Piranha Club Popeye Prince Valiant Pros & Cons Retail Rex Morgan, M.D. Rhymes with Orange Safe Havens Sally Forth Sam and Silo Sherman's Lagoon Shoe Six Chix Slylock Fox & Comics for Kids Tiger Tina's Groove Todd the Dinosaur Tundra Zippy Zits Historical Abie the Agent Agatha Crumm Apartment 3-G Archie Art Linkletter's Kids The Better Half Betty Boop Betty Boop and Felix Big Ben Bolt Boner's Ark Brick Bradford Bringing Up Father Buz Sawyer Captain Kate Crock Donald Duck Edge City Etta Kett Felix the Cat Flapper Filosofy Franklin Fibbs Grandma Grin and Bear It Gummi Bears Half Hitch Happy Hooligan Hejji Inside Woody Allen Johnny Hazard José Carioca Jungle Jim King of the Royal Mounted Krazy Kat Little Annie Rooney Little Iodine Little Jimmy The Little King Mister Breger Mickey Mouse My Cage Norb The Norm Oh, Brother! Ollie and Quentin Pete the Tramp Radio Patrol Red Barry Redeye Reg'lar Fellers Rip Kirby Rusty Riley Sam's Strip Scamp Secret Agent X-9 Steve Roper and Mike Nomad Strictly Richter Teena They'll Do It Every Time Tillie the Toiler Tim Tyler's Luck Toots and Casper Triple Take Trudy Tumbleweeds Uncle Remus Walt Disney's Treasury of Classic Tales What a Guy! Winnie the Pooh Related Billy Ireland Cartoon Library & Museum DailyINK Jay Kennedy King Comics King Features Syndicate National Cartoonists Society The Sunday Funnies Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Happy_Hooligan&oldid=697371366" Categories: American comic strips Fictional hoboes Fictional American people American comics characters 1900 comics debuts 1932 comics endings Gag-a-day comics Hidden categories: CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list Commons category without a link on Wikidata Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Article Talk Variants Views Read Edit View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Featured content Current events Random article Donate to Wikipedia Wikipedia store Interaction Help About Wikipedia Community portal Recent changes Contact page Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Cite this page Print/export Create a book Download as PDF Printable version Languages Deutsch Español Italiano Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Svenska Edit links This page was last modified on 30 December 2015, at 02:53. Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view