Talk:Honorific - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Talk:Honorific From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to: navigation, search WikiProject Sociology   SociologyWikipedia:WikiProject SociologyTemplate:WikiProject Sociologysociology articles Sociology portal v t e This article is within the scope of WikiProject Sociology, a collaborative effort to improve the coverage of sociology on Wikipedia. If you would like to participate, please visit the project page, where you can join the discussion and see a list of open tasks.  ???  This article has not yet received a rating on the project's quality scale.  ???  This article has not yet received a rating on the project's importance scale.   Contents 1 Deletion proposed 2 Specific titles 3 Korean and Japanese honorifics 4 AmE vs BrE 5 Master 6 2nd person despective 7 Globalize template 8 Merge and distinctions proposed 9 Filipino honorifics 10 Additions Requested 11 Islamic honorifics Deletion proposed[edit] For a May 2005 deletion debate over this page see Wikipedia:Votes for deletion/Honorific User:Jtdirl put in a gratuitous VfD tag (for reasons unrelated to the page content), but he did not do it right. Even though the VfD is silly, I've corrected its format. Lulu of the Lotus-Eaters 23:31, 2005 May 15 (UTC) Specific titles[edit] Would "Dear Leader" be an honorific? Andjam 04:28, 19 October 2005 (UTC) Would "He Whose Name Must Not Be Spoken" be an honorific? Ewlyahoocom 07:40, 23 September 2007 (UTC) I added these to the appropriate articles. -- Beland (talk) 00:27, 14 June 2013 (UTC) Korean and Japanese honorifics[edit] Titles appear to work similarly between Japanese and Korean, as do verb and noun forms. Perhaps this entry should be changed accordingly? Cheers, Eiríkr Útlendi 22:28, 6 December 2005 (UTC) Now see Honorifics (linguistics). -- Beland (talk) 00:27, 14 June 2013 (UTC) AmE vs BrE[edit] Is "honorific" an American spelling or common to both systems? I know "honor" and "honour" are different but can't recall ever seeing "honourific". Not important as such, just that the question wasn't answered. Yasha80.47.45.222 14:52, 25 June 2007 (UTC) I think it's honorific either way; it's spelled "honorific" on the right honourable page, anyway.. 138.69.160.1 18:02, 11 July 2007 (UTC) I can't find "honourific" in online dictionaries. Not sure it's a good idea to add a note about that to the article, lest the misspelling take hold and start spreading all over the Internet? 8) -- Beland (talk) 00:27, 14 June 2013 (UTC) Master[edit] "Master" for a boy is still in regular use in the UK as of 2011. Martin of Sheffield (talk) 09:04, 27 July 2011 (UTC) 2nd person despective[edit] According to the "Bengali" chapter of The World's Major Languages (ISBN 0-19-506511-5), the Bengali language has 2nd person despective forms (called "Very Familiar" on the Bengali grammar page). AnonMoos (talk) 20:33, 9 September 2008 (UTC) That would be for Honorifics (linguistics). -- Beland (talk) 23:36, 13 June 2013 (UTC) Globalize template[edit] I've removed a {{globalize}} from the "Modern English honorifics" section. There does not appear to be any discussion of it on this page, and while that particular section is devoted to English, the other sections, in my opinion, adequately cover worldwide uses. While it might be appropriate to make that section into a subsection of the "Other languages and cultures" section (and rename both), if someone wants to do that, they should do so. --NYKevin @351, i.e. 07:26, 10 January 2012 (UTC) Merge and distinctions proposed[edit] The article Use of courtesy titles and honorifics in professional writing proposes the following distinctions: Title of authority - designates the position held by an official, e.g. Chairman Honorific title - Mr., Ms., Prof., Dr., Captain, Coach, Reverend, etc. Style (manner of address) - A subset of honorific titles, usually associated with nobility and religious leaders, which include an article (the Right Honorable John Smith) or a pronoun in the second or third person (Your Honor, Her Majesty) The article title and general English usage refers to all of these things as "title"s. Apparently titles of authority can be combined with an honorific title (e.g. Mr. Chairman), but multiple honorific titles don't combine (e.g. *Mr. Professor). This article (Honorific does not cover grammatical and syntactic honorific particles; those are under Honorifics (linguistics) and are clearly distinguished by their parts of speech. Since all styles are also honorifics, and various readers have expressed consternation at being able to find the coverage they are looking for, I think it might be a good idea to merge Style (manner of address) into honorific but clearly explaining what counts as a "style". In practice, this article cannot be a big long list of all honorific titles; we need to move details out into subarticles like Royal and noble styles. Navigation to and from subarticles would be a lot easier with the proposed merge. The articles Title and Title of authority will also need some reorganization, but that will also be easier after we settle on the definitions and article distinctions here. -- Beland (talk) 00:23, 14 June 2013 (UTC) Filipino honorifics[edit] Are Filipino honorifics other than Doctor (Dr.) proper, according to international English standards? Are the "titles" Attorney (Atty.), Architect (Arch.), Engineer (Engr.) inventions, or are they just creations by almost all journalists and English teachers and writers? Even Director(Dir.), Secretary (Sec.), Assistant Secretary (Asec.), Undersecretary (Usec.), etc. They muddled the simple system! I feel that according to customs in English-speaking countries, all English-speaking Filipino non-doctorate professionals like architects,engineers, and lawyers (including those in military posts) in those countries, even their foreign counterparts who practice their profession in the Philippines whether their compatriots and non-compatriots alike addressed and talk to them, are to be introduced and referred to as simply Mr., Mrs., even Miss, and simply Sir or Ma'am/Madam when addressing them, depending on the bearer in question's preference and the person whom the bearer is being talked to. It must start with the children who are starting school. In listing names wherein no title precedes each name, consistency must exist. Is that how Filipino children (either full- or half-blooded) are taught (and apply what they learned) in speech and in writing? The honorifics I mentioned,as used by Filipino professionals in introducing themselves and being addressed, are mostly treated as "titles", and almost every establishment in the country (academic, mainstream/mass media, etc.) is using them as standard and customary. I now feel uncomfortable at their long-standing usage, so I question the way how and why it is. Do all these have anything to do with false titles? What can I do about these age-old situations? Santiago Claudio (talk) 14:17, 18 January 2014 (UTC) Additions Requested[edit] Before merging another article in with this one, I'd prefer to see experts spend their time expanding this one in 2 areas:  • Honorifics in Spanish, French, German, and Italian  • Abbreviations for honorifics in all languages covered I freely acknowledge that I am not an expert. 184.60.39.5 (talk) 19:39, 30 January 2014 (UTC) Islamic honorifics[edit] Why does Islamic honorifics redirect to something apparently unrelated? William M. Connolley (talk) 22:20, 17 January 2016 (UTC) Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Talk:Honorific&oldid=700336690" Categories: Unassessed sociology articles Unknown-importance sociology articles Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Article Talk Variants Views Read Edit New section View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Featured content Current events Random article Donate to Wikipedia Wikipedia store Interaction Help About Wikipedia Community portal Recent changes Contact page Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Print/export Create a book Download as PDF Printable version Languages This page was last modified on 17 January 2016, at 22:20. Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view