Album - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Album From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to: navigation, search This article is about albums of recorded music. For other uses, see Album (disambiguation). Early record albums were packages of 78 RPM records in book form. Albums of recorded music were developed in the early 20th century, first as books of individual 78rpm records, then from 1948 as vinyl LP records played at 33 1⁄3 rpm. Vinyl LPs are still issued, though in the 21st century albums sales have mostly focused on compact disc (CD) and MP3 formats. The audio cassette was a format used in the late 1970s through to the 1990s alongside vinyl. An album may be recorded in a recording studio (fixed or mobile), in a concert venue, at home, in the field, or a mix of places. Recording may take a few hours to several years to complete, usually in several takes with different parts recorded separately, and then brought or "mixed" together. Recordings that are done in one take without overdubbing are termed "live", even when done in a studio. Studios are built to absorb sound, eliminating reverberation, so as to assist in mixing different takes; other locations, such as concert venues and some "live rooms", allow for reverberation, which creates a "live" sound.[1] The majority of studio recordings contain an abundance of editing, sound effects, voice adjustments, etc. With modern recording technology, musicians can be recorded in separate rooms or at separate times while listening to the other parts using headphones; with each part recorded as a separate track. Album covers and liner notes are used, and sometimes additional information is provided, such as analysis of the recording, and lyrics or librettos.[2][3] Historically, the term "album" was applied to a collection of various items housed in a book format. In musical usage the word was used for collections of short pieces of printed music from the early nineteenth century.[4] Later, collections of related 78rpm records were bundled in book-like albums[5] (one side of a 78 rpm record could hold only about 3.5 minutes of sound). When long-playing records were introduced, a collection of pieces on a single record was called an album; the word was extended to other recording media such as compact disc, MiniDisc, Compact audio cassette, and digital albums as they were introduced.[6] Contents 1 History 2 Length 3 Tracks 4 Recording 5 Audio formats 5.1 Vinyl records 5.2 8-track tape 5.3 Compact cassette 5.4 Compact disc 5.5 MP3 albums, and similar 6 Types of album 6.1 Live 6.2 Solo 6.3 Tribute or cover 7 See also 8 References History The LP record (long play), or 33 1⁄3 rpm microgroove vinyl record, is a gramophone record format introduced by Columbia Records in 1948.[7] It was adopted by the record industry as a standard format for the "album". Apart from relatively minor refinements and the important later addition of stereophonic sound capability, it has remained the standard format for vinyl albums. The term "album" had been carried forward from the early nineteenth century when it had been used for collections of short pieces of music.[4] Later, collections of related 78rpm records were bundled in book-like albums.[5] When long-playing records were introduced, a collection of pieces on a single record was called an album; the word was extended to other recording media such as compact disc, MiniDisc, Compact audio cassette, and digital albums, as they were introduced.[6] As part of a trend of shifting sales in the music industry, some commenters have declared that the early 21st century experienced the death of the album. Length While an album may contain as many or as few tracks as required, the criteria for the UK Albums Chart is that a recording counts as an "album" if it either has more than four tracks or lasts more than 25 minutes.[8] Sometimes shorter albums are referred to as "mini-albums" or EPs.[9] Albums such as Tubular Bells, Amarok, Hergest Ridge by Mike Oldfield, and Yes's Close to the Edge, include fewer than four tracks. There are no formal 'rules' against artists such as Pinhead Gunpowder referring to their own releases under thirty minutes as "albums." If an album becomes too long to fit onto a single vinyl record or CD, it may be released as a double album where two vinyl LPs or compact discs are packaged together in a single case, or a triple album containing three LPs or compact discs. Recording artists who have an extensive back catalogue may re-release several CDs in one single box with a unified design, often containing one or more albums (in this scenario, these releases can sometimes be referred to as a "two (or three)-fer"), or a compilation of previously unreleased recordings. These are known as box sets. Some musical artists have also released more than three compact discs or LP records of new recordings at once, in the form of boxed sets, although in that case the work is still usually considered to be an album. Tracks This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (August 2007) Material (music or sounds) is stored on an album in sections termed tracks, normally 11 or 12 tracks. A music track (often simply referred to as a track) is an individual song or instrumental recording. The term is particularly associated with popular music where separate tracks are known as album tracks; the term is also used for other formats such as EPs and singles. When vinyl records were the primary medium for audio recordings a track could be identified visually from the grooves and many album covers or sleeves included numbers for the tracks on each side. On a compact disc the track number is indexed so that a player can jump straight to the start of any track. On digital music stores such as iTunes the term song is often used interchangeably with track regardless of whether there is any vocal content. Bonus tracks A bonus track (also known as a bonus cut or bonus) is a piece of music which has been included as an extra. This may be done as a marketing promotion, or for other reasons. It is not uncommon to include singles as bonus tracks on re-issues of old albums, where those tracks weren't originally included. Online music stores allow buyers to create their own albums by selecting songs themselves; bonus tracks may be included if a customer buys a whole album rather than just one or two songs from the artist. The song is not necessarily free nor is it available as a stand-alone download, adding also to the incentive to buy the complete album. In contrast to hidden tracks, bonus tracks are included on track listings and usually do not have a gap of silence between other album tracks. Recording The contents of the album are usually recorded in a studio or live in concert, though may be recorded in other locations, such as at home (as with JJ Cale's Okie,[10][11] Beck's Odelay,[12] David Gray's White Ladder,[13] and others),[14][15][16] in the field - as with early Blues recordings,[17] in prison,[18] or with a mobile recording unit such as the Rolling Stones Mobile Studio.[19][20] Although recording in a studio can be done using large multi-track systems with many overdubs and different takes of the same instrument, some recordings may be done "live" in order to reproduce the feel and energy of a live performance.[citation needed] Basic parts such as drums and rhythm guitar may be recorded live, with overdubs such as solos and vocals recorded later.[citation needed] Studio recordings may be mixed and mastered at different facilities.[citation needed] Audio formats See also: Timeline of audio formats Vinyl records Two vinyl records with inner and outer album sleeves Main article: LP record Vinyl LP records have two sides, each comprising one half of the album. If a pop or rock album contained tracks released separately as commercial singles, they were conventionally placed in particular positions on the album.[6] A common configuration was to have the album led off by the second and third singles, followed by a ballad. The first single would lead off side 2.[citation needed] In the past many singles (such as the Beatles' "Hey Jude" and Bob Dylan's "Positively 4th Street") did not appear on albums, but others (such as the Beatles' "Come Together" and Dylan's "Like a Rolling Stone") formed part of an album released concurrently. Today, many commercial albums of music tracks feature one or more singles, which are released separately to radio, TV or the Internet as a way of promoting the album.[21] Albums have also been issued that are compilations of older tracks not originally released together, such as singles not originally found on albums, b-sides of singles, or unfinished "demo" recordings.[6] Album sets of the past were sequenced for record changers. In the case of a two-record set, for example, sides 1 and 4 would be stamped on one record, and sides 2 and 3 on the other. The user would stack the two records onto the spindle of an automatic record changer, with side 1 on the bottom and side 2 (on the other record) on top. Side 1 would automatically drop onto the turntable and be played. When finished, the tone arm's position would trigger a mechanism which moved the arm out of the way, dropped the record with side 2, and played it. When both records had been played, the user would pick up the stack, turn it over, and put them back on the spindle—sides 3 and 4 would then play in sequence.[6] Record changers were used for many years of the LP era, but eventually fell out of use. 8-track tape A typical 8-track tape player Main article: 8-track tape 8-track tape (formally Stereo 8: commonly known as the eight-track cartridge, eight-track tape, or simply eight-track) is a magnetic tape sound recording technology popular in the United States[22] from the mid-1960s to the late 1970s when the Compact Cassette format took over.[23][24] The format is regarded as an obsolete technology, and was relatively unknown outside the United States, the United Kingdom, Canada and Australia.[25][26] Stereo 8 was created in 1964 by a consortium led by Bill Lear of Lear Jet Corporation, along with Ampex, Ford Motor Company, General Motors, Motorola, and RCA Victor Records (RCA). It was a further development of the similar Stereo-Pak four-track cartridge created by Earl "Madman" Muntz. A later quadraphonic version of the format was announced by RCA in April 1970 and first known as Quad-8, then later changed to just Q8. Compact cassette A blank compact cassette tape and case Main article: Compact Cassette The Compact Cassette was a popular medium for distributing pre-recorded music in the late 1970s through to the 1990s. The very first "Compact Cassette" was introduced by Philips in August 1963 in the form of a prototype.[27] Compact Cassettes became especially popular during the 1980s after the advent of the Sony Walkman, which allowed the person to control what they listened to.[27][28] The Walkman was convenient because of its size, the device could fit in most pockets and often came equipped with a clip for belts or pants.[27] Compact cassettes also saw the creation of mixtapes, which are tapes containing a compilation of songs created by any average listener of music.[29] The songs on a mixtape generally relate to one another in some way, whether it be a conceptual theme or an overall sound.[29] The compact cassette used double-sided magnetic tape to distribute music for commercial sale.[27][30] The music is recorded on both the "A" and "B" side of the tape, with cassette being "turned" to play the other side of the album.[27] Compact Cassettes were also a popular way for musicians to record "Demos" or "Demo Tapes" of their music to distribute to various record labels, in the hopes of acquiring a recording contract.[31] The sales of Compact Cassettes eventually began to decline in the 1990s, after the release and distribution Compact Discs. After the introduction of Compact discs, the term "Mixtape" began to apply to any personal compilation of songs on any given format.[29] Recently there has been a revival of Compact Cassettes by independent record labels and DIY musicians who prefer the format because of its difficulty to share over the internet.[32] Compact disc A compact disc within an open jewel case Main article: Compact disc The compact disc format replaced both the vinyl record and the cassette as the standard for the commercial mass-market distribution of physical music albums.[33] After the introduction of music downloading and MP3 players such as the iPod, US album sales dropped 54.6% from 2001 to 2009.[34] The CD is a digital data storage device which permits digital recording technology to be used to record and play-back the recorded music.[30][33] MP3 albums, and similar Main article: Music download The MP3 audio format has come along, revolutionizing the concept of digital storage. Early MP3 albums were basically CD-rips created by early CD-ripping software, and sometimes real-time rips from cassettes and vinyl. The so-called "MP3 album" isn't necessarily just in MP3 file format, in which higher quality formats such as FLAC and WAV can be used on storage mediums that MP3 albums reside on, such as CD-R-ROMs, hard drives, flash memory (e.g. thumbdrives, MP3 players, SD cards), etc.[citation needed] Types of album See also: Category:Album types Live Main article: Live album This section possibly contains original research. Please improve it by verifying the claims made and adding inline citations. Statements consisting only of original research should be removed. (July 2015) This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (July 2015) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) An album may be recorded in a recording studio (fixed or mobile), in a concert venue, at home, in the field, or a mix of places. Recording may take a few hours to several years to complete, usually in several takes with different parts recorded separately, and then brought or "mixed" together. Recordings that are done in one take without overdubbing are termed "live", even when done in a studio. Studios are built to absorb sound, eliminating reverberation, so as to assist in mixing different takes; other locations, such as concert venues and some "live rooms", allow for reverberation, which creates a "live" sound.[1] The majority of studio recordings contain an abundance of editing, sound effects, voice adjustments, etc. With modern recording technology, musicians can be recorded in separate rooms or at separate times while listening to the other parts using headphones; with each part recorded as a separate track. A live album is recorded during stage performances using remote recording techniques. Live albums may be recorded at a single concert, or combine recordings made at multiple concerts. They may include applause and other noise from the audience, comments by the performers between pieces, improvisation, medleys and so on. They often employ multitrack recording direct from the stage sound system (rather than microphones placed among the audience), and can employ additional manipulation and effects during post-production to enhance the quality of the recording. Solo For albums titled "Solo", see Solo (disambiguation). A solo album, in popular music, is an album headlined by a current or former member of a band. A solo album may feature simply one person performing all instruments, but typically features the work of other collaborators; rather, it may be made with different collaborators than the artist is usually associated, though just how different that group is varies widely. The concept of the solo album arose at least as early as the late 1940s. A 1947 Billboard magazine article heralded "Margaret Whiting huddling with Capitol execs over her first solo album on which she will be backed by Frank De Vol".[35] A modern example is rock musician Sting, who came to prominence as a member of The Police. For his first solo album, 1985's Dream of the Blue Turtles, Sting recruited an entirely different backing group with which to perform. However, it is common for musicians to recruit some of their "regular" bandmates for the recording of a solo album. Another example is the musician Peter Gabriel. Gabriel departed from the UK band Genesis with the birth of his first daughter, and wrote a song, "Solsbury Hill", to commemorate the event. There is no formal definition setting forth the amount of participation a band member can solicit from other members of his band, and still have the album referred to as a solo album. One reviewer wrote that Ringo Starr's third venture, Ringo, "[t]echnically... wasn't a solo album because all four Beatles appeared on it".[36] Three of the four members of the Beatles released solo albums while the group was officially still together, a pattern later replicated by other groups such as Kiss, who took the idea even further by releasing them on the same day and giving them similar artwork. A performer may record a solo album for a number of reasons. A solo performer working with other members will typically have full creative control of the band, be able to hire and fire accompanists, and get the majority of the proceeds. The performer may be able to produce songs that differ widely from the sound of the band with which the performer has been associated, or that the group as a whole chose not to include in its own albums. Graham Nash, of The Hollies described his experience in developing a solo album as follows: "The thing that I go through that results in a solo album is an interesting process of collecting songs that can't be done, for whatever reason, by a lot of people".[37] A solo album may also represent the departure of the performer from the group. Tribute or cover This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (December 2015) This section appears to be a dictionary definition. Please rewrite it to present the subject from an encyclopedic point of view. If it cannot be turned into a full encyclopedia article in the near future, consider moving it to Wiktionary. Steps for moving to Wiktionary:  Check that this section meets Wiktionary's criteria for inclusion. Check that Wiktionary does not have an article on this word or phrase, as verified using the search page. If Wiktionary has a definition already, change this tag to {{TWCleanup2}} or else consider a soft redirect to Wiktionary by replacing the text on this page with {{Wi}}. If Wiktionary does not have the definition yet, consider moving the whole section to Wiktionary by replacing this tag with the template {{Copy to Wiktionary}}. This template will no longer automatically categorize articles as candidates to move to Wiktionary. A tribute or cover album is a collection of cover versions of songs or instrumental compositions. Its concept may involve various artists covering the songs of a single artist, genre or period, a single artist covering the songs of various artists or a single artist, genre or period, or any variation of an album of cover songs which is marketed as a "tribute". See also Look up album in Wiktionary, the free dictionary. Wikimedia Commons has media related to Music albums. Album cover Album Era Album-oriented rock Box set Compilation album Concept album Double album Extended play List of albums Live album Release (music) Remix album Soundtrack album Split album References ^ a b Philip Newell (18 Jul 2013). Recording Studio Design. Taylor & Francis. pp. 169–170.  ^ "Album Cover Art Series". Rock Art Picture Show. Retrieved 30 May 2012.  ^ "The history of the CD – The 'Jewel Case'". Philips Research. Retrieved 30 May 2012.  ^ a b "Mendelssohn And Schumann". Old and Sold. Retrieved 29 May 2012.  ^ a b Cross, Alan (15 July 2012) Life After the Album Is Going to Get Weird. alancross.ca ^ a b c d e "About Vinyl Records". Record Collector's Guild. Retrieved 29 May 2012.  ^ "First LP released". wired.com.  ^ "Rules For Chart Eligibility – Albums" (PDF). The Official UK Charts Company. January 2007. Archived from the original (pdf) on 27 June 2007. Retrieved 20 April 2007.  ^ "As albums fade away, music industry looks to shorter records". Associated Press. Retrieved 1 June 2012.  ^ "JJ-Cale-Okie". discogs.com.  ^ "JJ Cale Obituary". telegraph.co.uk. 28 July 2013.  ^ "100 Greatest Albums: 16 Beck Odelay". Spin: 75. July 2008.  ^ "UK Fave Tom McRae Bows In States Via Arista". Billboard: 11. 18 Aug 2001.  ^ Matt Fowler (14 January 2014). "15 Legendary Albums That Were Recorded in Bedrooms, Kitchens, and Garages". mic.com.  ^ Michael Duncan (12 February 2015). "10 Classic Albums Made Outside the Recording Studio". sonicscoop.com.  ^ Tyler Kane (17 January 2012). "10 Great Albums Recorded at Home". pastemagazine.com.  ^ Bruce Bastin (1 Jan 1995). Red River Blues: The Blues Tradition in the Southeast. University of Illinois Press. p. 64.  ^ "Rare 1979 soul album recorded in a prison gets reissue". thevinylfactory.com.  ^ Bob Buontempo (16 May 2013). "Can Award-Winning Recordings Be Made In A Home Studio?". prosoundweb.com.  ^ Frank Mastropolo (23 October 2014). "A Look Back at the Rolling Stones Mobile Studio: ‘A Watershed Moment in Recording Technology’". ultimateclassicrock.com.  ^ "Chronology: Technology and the Music Industry". Callie Tainter. Retrieved 30 May 2012.  ^ "What Are 8-Track Tapes?". wisegeek.com. Retrieved 14 February 2015.  ^ http://www.goldminemag.com/collector-resources/collectors-corner-the-history-of-the-eight-track-tape. Retrieved 2014-01-22.  Missing or empty |title= (help) ^ "What Are 8-Track Tapes?". Retrieved 2014-01-22.  ^ Moore, Dan. "Collector’s Corner: The History Of The Eight-Track Tape". Goldmine magazine. Retrieved 14 February 2015.  ^ . wisegeek.com http://www.wisegeek.com/what-are-8-track-tapes.htm. Retrieved 14 February 2015.  Missing or empty |title= (help) ^ a b c d e "History of Compact Cassette". Vintage Cassettes. Retrieved 30 May 2012.  ^ Haire, Meaghan (1 July 2009). "A Brief History of The Walkman". Time. Retrieved 31 May 2012.  ^ a b c "Mixtape History". MTV. Retrieved 5 July 2012.  ^ a b "The History of Recorded Music". Music Cd Industry. Retrieved 30 May 2012.  ^ "Demo Tapes". Dave Mandl. Retrieved 5 July 2012.  ^ "Cassette Revival". Mediageek. Retrieved 5 July 2012.  ^ a b "The history of the CD – The beginning". Philips Research. Retrieved 30 May 2012.  ^ "Scary Stat: Album Sales Down 54.6 Percent Since 2000...". Digital Music Newss. Retrieved 5 June 2012.  ^ Billboard Magazine (April 5, 1947), p. 21. ^ Jay Warner, On this day in music history (2004), p. 323. ^ Dave Zimmer, 4 way street: the Crosby, Stills, Nash & Young reader (2004), p. 218. v t e Music History of music and Classical history Prehistoric Ancient Religious Biblical Classical music Medieval Renaissance Baroque Classical period Romantic Impressionist 20th century Contemporary 21st century Traditional music Blues Country music Jazz Folk music Popular music Hip-hop music Pop music Soul music Rock music Heavy metal music Punk rock Performance Ensembles Choir Concert band Conducting Instrumentalist Musical ensemble Musician Orchestra Rhythm section Singer Lead singer Backup singer Theory Composition Form Genre Notation Composer Improvisation Songwriter Education and study Bachelor of Music Master of Music Doctor of Musical Arts PhD Music education Music history Music psychology Cultural aspects Musicology Ethnomusicology Ecomusicology Production Musician Performance Band (rock or pop) Backing band All-female band Rhythm section Big band Conducting DJ Lyrics Song Single A-side and B-side EP Cover Remix Album compilation live remix Audio engineer Record label Record producer Sampling Music technology (electric) Music technology (electronic and digital) Microphone Sound recording Cultural and regional genres African Central East North Southern West Asian Central East Middle Eastern South Southeast European Central Eastern Northern Southeastern Southern Western Latin American Central American South American North American Caribbean Oceanian Melanesian Micronesian Polynesian By sovereign state     Afghanistan Albania Algeria Andorra Angola Antigua and Barbuda Argentina Armenia Australia Austria Azerbaijan Bahamas Bahrain Bangladesh Barbados Belarus Belgium Belize Benin Bhutan Bolivia Bosnia and Herzegovina Botswana Brazil Brunei Bulgaria Burkina Faso Burundi Cambodia Cameroon Canada Cape Verde Central African Republic Chad Chile China Colombia Comoros Costa Rica Croatia Cuba Cyprus Czech Republic Democratic Republic of the Congo Denmark Djibouti Dominica Dominican Republic East Timor Ecuador Egypt El Salvador Equatorial Guinea Eritrea Estonia Ethiopia Federated States of Micronesia Fiji Finland France Gabon Gambia Georgia Germany Ghana Greece Grenada Guatemala Guinea Guinea-Bissau Guyana Haiti Honduras Hungary Iceland India Indonesia Iran Iraq Ireland Israel Italy Ivory Coast Jamaica Japan Jordan Kazakhstan Kenya Kiribati Kuwait Kyrgyzstan Laos Latvia Lebanon Lesotho Liberia Libya Liechtenstein Lithuania Luxembourg Madagascar Malawi Malaysia Maldives Mali Malta Marshall Islands Mauritania Mauritius Mexico Moldova Monaco Mongolia Montenegro Morocco Mozambique Myanmar Namibia Nauru Nepal Netherlands New Zealand Nicaragua Niger Nigeria North Korea Norway Oman Pakistan Palau Panama Papua New Guinea Paraguay Peru Philippines Poland Portugal Qatar Republic of Macedonia Republic of the Congo Romania Russia Rwanda Saint Kitts and Nevis Saint Lucia Saint Vincent and the Grenadines Samoa San Marino São Tomé and Príncipe Saudi Arabia Senegal Serbia Seychelles Sierra Leone Singapore Slovakia Slovenia Solomon Islands Somalia South Africa South Korea Spain Sri Lanka Sudan Suriname Swaziland Sweden Switzerland Syria Taiwan Tajikistan Tanzania Thailand Togo Tonga Trinidad and Tobago Tunisia Turkey Turkmenistan Tuvalu Uganda Ukraine United Arab Emirates United Kingdom United States Uruguay Uzbekistan Vanuatu Vatican City Venezuela Vietnam Yemen Zambia Zimbabwe Lists Index Outline Terminology Instruments Musical forms by era Cultural and regional genres Popular music genres Albums Songs Jazz and popular music glossary Audio See also Musical instrument Music festival Music therapy Music and politics Women and music Category Portal WikiProject Authority control NDL: 00560327 Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Album&oldid=711258803" Categories: Albums Media formats Hidden categories: Pages with citations lacking titles Pages with citations having bare URLs Wikipedia pages semi-protected against vandalism Use dmy dates from March 2015 Articles needing additional references from August 2007 All articles needing additional references All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from December 2015 Articles with unsourced statements from November 2014 Articles with unsourced statements from May 2015 Articles that may contain original research from July 2015 All articles that may contain original research Articles needing additional references from July 2015 Articles needing additional references from December 2015 Flagged dictionary definitions Commons category with local link same as on Wikidata Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Article Talk Variants Views Read View source View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Featured content Current events Random article Donate to Wikipedia Wikipedia store Interaction Help About Wikipedia Community portal Recent changes Contact page Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Cite this page Print/export Create a book Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Languages العربية Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца)‎ Български Bosanski Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto فارسی Français Gaeilge Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Italiano עברית ქართული Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvių Magyar Македонски მარგალური Bahasa Melayu Nāhuatl Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Oʻzbekcha/ўзбекча Polski Português Română Русский Sardu Scots Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina کوردیی ناوەندی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog ไทย Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt Võro ייִדיש 粵語 中文 Edit links This page was last modified on 21 March 2016, at 20:35. Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view