Croatian language - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Croatian language From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to: navigation, search "Hrvatski" redirects here. For other uses, see Hrvatski (disambiguation). Croatian hrvatski Pronunciation [xř̩ʋaːtskiː] Native to Croatia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Serbia (Vojvodina), Montenegro, Romania (Caraș-Severin County), Slovenia, and diaspora Native speakers (5.6 million, including other dialects spoken by Croats cited 1991–2006)[1] 1.25 million L2 speakers in Slovenia (2012) Language family Indo-European Balto-Slavic Slavic South Slavic Western[1] Serbo-Croatian[2] Shtokavian Neo-Shtokavian Eastern Herzegovinian Croatian Writing system Latin (Gaj's alphabet) Yugoslav Braille Official status Official language in  Croatia  Bosnia and Herzegovina  Serbia (in Vojvodina)  European Union Recognised minority language in  Slovakia  Czech Republic[3]  Montenegro  Austria (in Burgenland)  Hungary (in Baranya County)  Italy (in Molise)  Romania (in Carașova, Lupac) Regulated by Institute of Croatian Language and Linguistics Language codes ISO 639-1 hr ISO 639-2 hrv ISO 639-3 hrv Glottolog croa1245[4] Linguasphere part of 53-AAA-g Traditional extent of Serbo-Croatian dialects in Croatia and in Bosnia and Herzegovina This article contains IPA phonetic symbols. Without proper rendering support, you may see question marks, boxes, or other symbols instead of Unicode characters. South Slavic languages and dialects Western South Slavic Slovene Dialects (Prekmurje Slovene Resian) Serbo-Croatian Serbo-Croatian standard languages Bosnian Croatian Montenegrin Serbian (Slavonic-Serbian) Serbo-Croatian dialects Shtokavian (Bunjevac Dubrovnik Eastern Herzegovinian Smederevo–Vršac Šumadija–Vojvodina Užican) Chakavian (Burgenland Molise) Kajkavian Torlakian Serbo-Croatian accents Ekavian Ijekavian Ikavian Comparison of standard Bosnian, Croatian and Serbian Eastern South Slavic Church Slavonic (Old) Bulgarian Dialects Banat Torlakian Meshterski Macedonian Dialects (Western Southeastern Northern Torlakian) Spoken Macedonian Standard Macedonian Transitional dialects Serbian–Bulgarian–Macedonian Transitional Bulgarian dialects Torlakian Gora dialect Croatian–Slovenian Kajkavian Alphabets Modern Gaj's Latina Serbian Cyrillic Bulgarian Cyrillic Macedonian Cyrillic Montenegrin Slavica Slovene Historical Bohoričica Dajnčica Metelčica Arebica Bosnian Cyrillic Glagolitic Early Cyrillic a Includes Banat Bulgarian alphabet. v t e Croatian i/kroʊˈeɪʃən/ (hrvatski [xř̩ʋaːtskiː]) is the standardized variety of the Serbo-Croatian language[5][6][7] used by Croats,[8] principally in Croatia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, the Serbian province of Vojvodina and other neighbouring countries. It is the official and literary standard of Croatia and one of the official languages of the European Union. Croatian is also one of the official languages of Bosnia and Herzegovina and neighbouring countries. Standard Croatian is based on the most widespread dialect of Serbo-Croatian, Shtokavian, more specifically on Eastern Herzegovinian, which is also the basis of Standard Serbian, Bosnian, and Montenegrin. In the mid-18th century, the first attempts to provide a Croatian literary standard began on the basis of the Neo-Shtokavian dialect that served as a supraregional lingua franca pushing back regional Chakavian, Kajkavian, and Shtokavian vernaculars.[9] The decisive role was played by Croatian Vukovians, who cemented the usage of Ijekavian Neo-Shtokavian as the literary standard in the late 19th and the beginning of the 20th century, as well as designed a phonological orthography.[10] Croatian is written in Gaj's Latin alphabet.[11] Besides the Shtokavian dialect on which Standard Croatian is based, Croats also speak Chakavian and Kajkavian. These dialects, and the four national standards, are usually subsumed under the term "Serbo-Croatian" in English, though this term is controversial for native speakers,[12] and paraphrases such as "Bosnian-Croatian-Montenegrin-Serbian" are therefore sometimes used instead, especially in diplomatic circles. Contents 1 History 1.1 Modern language and standardization 1.2 Illyrian period 2 Distinguishing features and differences between standards 3 Sociopolitical standpoints 4 Official status 5 See also 6 References 7 Sources 8 Further reading 9 External links 9.1 Language history History[edit] See also: Early development of Serbo-Croatian Modern language and standardization[edit] In the late medieval period up to the 17th century, the majority of semi-autonomous Croatia was ruled by two domestic dynasties of princes (banovi), the Zrinski and the Frankopan, which were linked by inter-marriage.[13] Toward the 17th century, both of them attempted to unify Croatia both culturally and linguistically, writing in a mixture of all three principal dialects (Chakavian, Kajkavian and Shtokavian), and calling it "Croatian", "Dalmatian", or "Slavonian".[14] It is still used now in parts of Istria, which became a crossroads of various mixtures of Chakavian with Ekavian/Ijekavian/Ikavian dialects.[15] The most standardized form (Kajkavian–Ikavian) became the cultivated language of administration and intellectuals from the Istrian peninsula along the Croatian coast, across central Croatia up into the northern valleys of the Drava and the Mura. The cultural apex of this 17th century idiom is represented by the editions of "Adrianskoga mora sirena" ("Siren of Adriatic Sea") by Petar Zrinski and "Putni tovaruš" ("Traveling escort") by Katarina Zrinska.[16][17] However, this first linguistic renaissance in Croatia was halted by the political execution of Petar Zrinski and Fran Krsto Frankopan by the Holy Roman Emperor Leopold I in Vienna in 1671.[18] Subsequently the Croatian elite in the 18th century gradually abandoned this combined Croatian standard.[19] Illyrian period[edit] Main article: Illyrian movement The Illyrian movement was a 19th-century pan-South Slavic political and cultural movement in Croatia that had the goal to standardize the regionally differentiated and orthographically inconsistent literary languages in Croatia, and finally merge them into a common South Slavic literary language. Specifically, three major groups of dialects were spoken on Croatian territory, and there had been several literary languages over four centuries. The leader of the Illyrian movement Ljudevit Gaj standardized the Latin alphabet in 1830–1850 and worked to bring about a standardized orthography. Although based in Kajkavian-speaking Zagreb, Gaj supported using the more populous Neo-Shtokavian – a version of Shtokavian that eventually became the predominant dialectal basis of both Croatian and Serbian literary language from the 19th century on.[20] Supported by various South Slavic proponents, Neo-Shtokavian was adopted after an Austrian initiative at the Vienna Literary Agreement of 1850,[19] laying the foundation for the unified Serbo-Croatian literary language. The uniform Neo-Shtokavian then became common in the Croatian elite.[19] In the 1860s, the Zagreb Philological School dominated the Croatian cultural life, drawing upon linguistic and ideological conceptions advocated by the members of the Illyrian movement.[21] While it was dominant over the rival Rijeka Philological School and Zadar Philological Schools, its influence waned with the rise of the Croatian Vukovians (at the end of the 19th century).[22] Distinguishing features and differences between standards[edit] Main article: Comparison of standard Bosnian, Croatian and Serbian See also: Serbo-Croatian phonology and Serbo-Croatian grammar Croatian is commonly characterized by the Ijekavian pronunciation (see an explanation of yat reflexes), the sole use of the Latin alphabet, and a number of lexical differences in common words that set it apart from standard Serbian.[23] Some differences are absolute, while some appear mainly in the frequency of use.[23] Sociopolitical standpoints[edit] Croatian, although technically a form of Serbo-Croatian, is sometimes considered a distinct language by itself.[24] Purely linguistic considerations of languages based on mutual intelligibility (abstand languages) are frequently incompatible with sociopolitical conceptions of language so that varieties that are mutually intelligible may be considered separate languages. Differences between various standard forms of Serbo-Croatian are often exaggerated for political reasons.[25] Most Croatian linguists regard Croatian as a separate language that is considered key to national identity.[26] The issue is sensitive in Croatia as the notion of a separate language being the most important characteristic of a nation is widely accepted, stemming from the 19th-century history of Europe.[27] The 1967 Declaration on the Status and Name of the Croatian Literary Language, in which a group of Croatian authors and linguists demanded greater autonomy for the Croatian language, is viewed in Croatia as a linguistic policy milestone that was also a general milestone in national politics.[28] The terms "Serbo-Croatian" or "Serbo-Croat" are still used as a cover term for all these forms by foreign scholars, even though the speakers themselves largely do not use it.[23] In Croatia, this is often based on the argument that the official language in Yugoslavia, a standardized form of Serbo-Croatian, was "artificial" or a political tool used to combine two distinct people.[citation needed] Within ex-Yugoslavia, the term has largely been replaced by the ethnic terms Serbian, Croatian, and Bosnian.[29] The use of the name "Croatian" for a language names has been historically attested to, though not always distinctively; the Croatian–Hungarian Agreement, for example, designated "Croatian" as one of its official languages,[30] and Croatian became an official EU language upon accession of Croatia to the EU on 1 July 2013.[31][32] In 2013, the EU started publishing a Croatian language version of its official gazette.[33] Official status[edit] Areas with an ethnic Croatian majority (as of 2006) Standard Croatian is the official language of the Republic of Croatia[34] and, along with Standard Bosnian and Standard Serbian, one of three official languages of Bosnia and Herzegovina.[35] It is also official in the regions of Burgenland (Austria),[36] Molise (Italy)[37] and Vojvodina (Serbia).[38] Additionally, it has co-official status alongside Romanian in the communes of Carașova[39] and Lupac,[40][41] Romania. In these localities, Croats or Krashovani make up the majority of the population, and education, signage and access to public administration and the justice system are provided in Croatian, alongside Romanian. Croatian is officially used and taught at all the universities in Croatia, and at the University of Mostar in Bosnia and Herzegovina. There is no regulatory body that determines the proper usage of Croatian. The current standard language is generally laid out in the grammar books and dictionaries used in education, such as the school curriculum prescribed by the Ministry of Education and the university programmes of the Faculty of Philosophy at the four main universities.[citation needed][dated info] In 2013, a Hrvatski pravopis by the Institute of Croatian Language and Linguistics received an official sole seal of approval from the Ministry of Education. Attempts are being made to revive Croatian literature in Italy.[42][not in citation given] The most prominent recent editions describing the Croatian standard language are: Hrvatski pravopis by the Institute of Croatian Language and Linguistics, available online Rječnik hrvatskoga jezika by Anić Rječnik hrvatskoga jezika by Šonje et al. Hrvatski enciklopedijski rječnik, by a group of authors Hrvatska gramatika by Barić et al. Also notable are the recommendations of Matica hrvatska, the national publisher and promoter of Croatian heritage, and the Lexicographical institute Miroslav Krleža, as well as the Croatian Academy of Sciences and Arts. Numerous representative Croatian linguistic works were published since the independence of Croatia, among them three voluminous monolingual dictionaries of contemporary Croatian. See also[edit] Croatia portal Languages portal Croatian Language Corpus Croatian National Corpus Days of the Croatian Language Language secessionism in Serbo-Croatian Mutual intelligibility Dialects of Serbo-Croatian Pluricentric Serbo-Croatian language References[edit] ^ a b Croatian at Ethnologue (18th ed., 2015) ^ "Serbo-Croatian". Ethnologue.com. Retrieved 2010-04-24.  The official language of Croatia is Croatian (Serbo-Croatian). [...] The same language is referred to by different names, Serbian (srpski), Serbo-Croat (in Croatia: hrvatsko-srpski), Bosnian (bosanski), based on political and ethnic grounds. [...] the language that used to be officially called Serbo-Croat has gotten several new ethnically and politically based names. Thus, the names Serbian, Croatian, and Bosnian are politically determined and refer to the same language with possible slight variations. ("Croatia: Language Situation", in Encyclopedia of Language and Linguistics, 2 ed., 2006.) ^ "Národnostní menšiny v České republice a jejich jazyky" [National Minorities in Czech Republic and Their Language] (PDF) (in Czech). Government of Czech Republic. p. 2. Podle čl. 3 odst. 2 Statutu Rady je jejich počet 12 a jsou uživateli těchto menšinových jazyků: [...], srbština a ukrajinština  ^ Nordhoff, Sebastian; Hammarström, Harald; Forkel, Robert; Haspelmath, Martin, eds. (2013). "Croatian". Glottolog. Leipzig: Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary Anthropology.  ^ David Dalby, Linguasphere (1999/2000, Linguasphere Observatory), pg. 445, 53-AAA-g, "Srpski+Hrvatski, Serbo-Croatian". ^ Benjamin W. Fortson IV, Indo-European Language and Culture: An Introduction, 2nd ed. (2010, Blackwell), pg. 431, "Because of their mutual intelligibility, Serbian, Croatian, and Bosnian are usually thought of as constituting one language called Serbo-Croatian." ^ Václav Blažek, "On the Internal Classification of Indo-European Languages: Survey" retrieved 20 Oct 2010, pp. 15–16. ^ E.C. Hawkesworth, "Serbian-Croatian-Bosnian Linguistic Complex", in the Encyclopedia of Language and Linguistics, 2nd edition, 2006. ^ Bičanić et al. (2013:55) ^ Bičanić et al. (2013:84) ^ "Croatia: Themes, Authors, Books | Yale University Library Slavic and East European Collection". Library.yale.edu. 2009-11-16. Retrieved 2010-10-27.  ^ Radio Free Europe – Serbian, Croatian, Bosnian, Or Montenegrin? Or Just 'Our Language'? Živko Bjelanović: Similar, But Different, Feb 21, 2009, accessed Oct 8, 2010 ^ Gazi, Stephen (1973). A History of Croatia. New York: Philosophical library. ISBN 978-0-8022-2108-7.  |access-date= requires |url= (help) ^ Van Antwerp Fine, John (2006). When Ethnicity did not Matter in the Balkans. Michigan, USA: University of Michigan Press. pp. 377–379. ISBN 978-0-472-11414-6.  |access-date= requires |url= (help) ^ Kalsbeek, Janneke (1998). "The Čakavian dialect of Orbanići near Žminj in Istria". Studies in Slavic and General Linguistics (Rodopi) 25.  |access-date= requires |url= (help) ^ "Matica Hrvatska - Dva brata i jedna Sirena". Retrieved 9 March 2012.  ^ "Matica Hrvatska - Putni tovaruš - izvornik (I.)". Retrieved 9 March 2012.  ^ Tanner, Marcus (1997). Croatia: a Nation Forged in War. New Haven, USA: Yale University Press. p. 50. ISBN 0-300-06933-2.  ^ a b c Malić, Dragica (1997). Razvoj hrvatskog književnog jezika. ISBN 953-0-40010-1. [page needed] ^ Uzelac, Gordana (2006). The development of the Croatian nation: an historical and sociological analysis. New York: Edwin Mellen Press. p. 75. ISBN 978-0-7734-5791-1.  |access-date= requires |url= (help) ^ Bičanić et al. 2013, p. 77. ^ Bičanić et al. 2013, p. 78. ^ a b c Corbett & Browne 2009, p. 334. ^ Cvetkovic, Ljudmila. "Serbian, Croatian, Bosnian, Or Montenegrin? Or Just 'Our Language'? – Radio Free Europe / Radio Liberty © 2010". Rferl.org. Retrieved 2010-11-01.  ^ Benjamin W. Fortson IV, Indo-European Language and Culture: An Introduction, 2nd ed. (2010, Blackwell), pg. 431. ^ Snježana Ramljak; Library of the Croatian Parliament, Zagreb, Croatia (June 2008). ""Jezično" pristupanje Hrvatske Europskoj Uniji: prevođenje pravne stečevine i europsko nazivlje" [The Accession of the Croatian Language to the European Union: Translation of the Acquis Communautaire and European Legal Terminology]. Croatian Political Science Review (in Serbo-Croatian) (Faculty of Political Science, University of Zagreb) 45 (1). ISSN 0032-3241. Retrieved 2012-02-27.  CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list (link) ^ Stokes 2008, p. 348. ^ Šute 1999, p. 317. ^ David Crystal "Language Death", Cambridge University Press, 2000, pp. 11, 12 ^ http://www.crohis.com/izvori/nagodba2.pdf ^ "Vandoren: EU membership – challenge and chance for Croatia – Daily – tportal.hr". Daily.tportal.hr. 2010-09-30. Retrieved 2010-10-27.  ^ "Applications for Croatian linguists". EU careers. 2012-06-21. Retrieved 2012-09-10.  ^ "Službeni list Europske unije" [Official Gazette of the European Union] (in Serbo-Croatian). European Union. Retrieved 29 January 2013.  ^ "Croatia". Cia.gov. Retrieved 2010-12-21.  ^ "Ethnologue report for Bosnia and Herzegovina". Ethnologue.com. Retrieved 2010-12-21.  ^ Kinda-Berlakovich, Andrea Zorka (2006). "Hrvatski nastavni jezik u Gradišću u školsko-političkome kontekstu" [Croatian as the Language of Instruction and Language Policy in Burgenland from 1921 onwards]. LAHOR (Croatian Philological Society) 1 (1): 27–35. ISSN 1846-2197.  ^ "Endangered languages in Europe: report". Helsinki.fi. Retrieved 2010-10-27.  ^ "www.puma.vojvodina.gov.rs". Puma.vojvodina.gov.rs. Retrieved 2010-12-21.  ^ "Structura Etno-demografică a României". Edrc.ro. Retrieved 2010-10-27.  ^ "Structura Etno-demografică a României". Edrc.ro. Retrieved 2010-10-27.  ^ "Structura Etno-demografică a României". Edrc.ro. Retrieved 2010-12-21.  ^ "From Gordon, Raymond G., Jr. (ed.), 2005. Ethnologue: Languages of the World, Fifteenth edition. Dallas, Tex.: SIL International". Ethnologue.com. Retrieved 2010-01-26.  Sources[edit] Bičanić, Ante; Frančić, Anđela; Hudeček, Lana; Mihaljević, Milica (2013), Pregled povijesti, gramatike i pravopisa hrvatskog jezika (in Serbo-Croatian), Croatica  Corbett, Greville; Browne, Wayles (2009). "Serbo-Croat - Bosnian, Croatian, Montenegrin, Serbian". In Comrie, Bernard. The World's Major Languages. Routledge. ISBN 9781134261567.  Stokes, Gale (2008). Yugoslavia: Oblique Insights and Observations. University of Pittsburgh Pre. ISBN 9780822973492.  Šute, Ivica (April 1999). "Deklaracija o nazivu i položaju hrvatskog književnog jezika – Građa za povijest Deklaracije, Zagreb, 1997, str. 225" [Declaration on the Status and Name of the Croatian Standard Language – Declaration History Articles, Zagreb, 1997, p. 225]. Radovi Zavoda za hrvatsku povijest (in Serbo-Croatian) 31 (1): 317–318. ISSN 0353-295X. Retrieved 5 July 2014.  "SOS ili tek alibi za nasilje nad jezikom" [SOS, or nothing but an alibi for violence against language] (in Serbo-Croatian). Zagreb: Forum. 16 March 2012. pp. 38–39. ISSN 1848-204X. Archived from the original on 7 July 2012. Retrieved 9 April 2015.  Further reading[edit] Bičanić, Ante; Frančić, Anđela; Hudeček, Lana; Mihaljević, Milica (2013), Pregled povijesti, gramatike i pravopisa hrvatskog jezika (in Serbo-Croatian), Croatica  Banac, Ivo: Main Trends in the Croatian Language Question, YUP 1984 Blum, Daniel (2002). Sprache und Politik : Sprachpolitik und Sprachnationalismus in der Republik Indien und dem sozialistischen Jugoslawien (1945-1991) [Language and Policy: Language Policy and Linguistic Nationalism in the Republic of India and the Socialist Yugoslavia (1945-1991)]. Beiträge zur Südasienforschung ; vol. 192 (in German). Würzburg: Ergon. p. 200. ISBN 3-89913-253-X. OCLC 51961066.  (CROLIB). Franolić, Branko: A Historical Survey of Literary Croatian, Nouvelles Editions Latines, 1984 —— (1985). A Bibliography of Croatian Dictionaries. Paris: Nouvelles Editions Latines. p. 139.  —— (1988). Language Policy in Yugoslavia with special reference to Croatian. Paris: Nouvelles Editions Latines.  ——; Žagar, Mateo (2008). A Historical Outline of Literary Croatian & The Glagolitic Heritage of Croatian Culture. London & Zagreb: Erasmus & CSYPN. ISBN 978-953-6132-80-5.  Greenberg, Robert David (2004). Language and identity in the Balkans: Serbo-Croatian and its disintegration. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-925815-4.  (reprinted in 2008 as ISBN 978-0-19-920875-3) Gröschel, Bernhard (2009). Das Serbokroatische zwischen Linguistik und Politik: mit einer Bibliographie zum postjugoslavischen Sprachenstreit [Serbo-Croatian Between Linguistics and Politics: With a Bibliography of the Post-Yugoslav Language Dispute]. Lincom Studies in Slavic Linguistics ; vol 34 (in German). Munich: Lincom Europa. p. 451. ISBN 978-3-929075-79-3. LCCN 2009473660. OCLC 428012015. OL 15295665W.  Inhaltsverzeichnis. Kačić, Miro: Croatian and Serbian: Delusions and Distortions, Novi Most, Zagreb 1997 Kordić, Snježana (2010). Jezik i nacionalizam [Language and Nationalism] (PDF). Rotulus Universitas (in Serbo-Croatian). Zagreb: Durieux. p. 430. ISBN 978-953-188-311-5. LCCN 2011520778. OCLC 729837512. OL 15270636W. Archived from the original on 8 July 2012. Retrieved 7 March 2013.  Moguš, Milan: A History of the Croatian Language, NZ Globus, 1995 Težak, Stjepko: "Hrvatski naš (ne)zaboravljeni" [Croatian, our (un)forgotten language], 301 p., knjižnica Hrvatski naš svagdašnji (knj. 1), Tipex, Zagreb, 1999, ISBN 953-6022-35-4 (Croatian) External links[edit] Croatian edition of Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Wikimedia Commons has media related to Croatian language. Wikivoyage has a phrasebook for Croatian. Wikibooks has a book on the topic of: Croatian For a list of words relating to Croatian language, see the Croatian language category of words in Wiktionary, the free dictionary. Croatian Swadesh list of basic vocabulary words (from Wiktionary's Swadesh-list appendix) EUdict – online dictionary – translation from Croatian into many languages and vice versa Croatian Language Corpus Croatian Old Dictionary Portal Language history[edit] The Croatian Language Today, a lecture given by dr. Branko Franolić History of Croatian Dictionaries and Grammar books at Yale University Library – Slavic and East European Collection   Links to related articles v t e Croatian language Features Alphabet Grammar Dialects Shtokavian Chakavian Kajkavian Burgenland Croatian Molise Croatian Names Patronymic names List of exonyms Months History and literature Literature 1967 Declaration Promotion and purism Croatian National Corpus Days of the Croatian Language Council for Standard Croatian Language Norm Institute of Croatian Language and Linguistics Croatian Encyclopedia Linguistic purism Studies Related topics Croatian Sign Language v t e Croatia articles History Prehistoric Origins of Croats White Croatia Dalmatian Croatia Pannonian Croatia Pagania Zahumlje Travunija Medieval kingdom Personal union with Hungary Republic of Ragusa Croatia in the Habsburg Empire Kingdom of Croatia-Slavonia State of Slovenes, Croats and Serbs Kingdom of Yugoslavia Banovina of Croatia World War II Independent State Socialist Republic War of Independence Croatia since 1995 European Union Geography Climate Extreme points Islands Lakes Mammals Mountains Protected areas Rivers Topography Politics Administrative divisions cities counties municipalities Constitution Elections Foreign relations Government Prime Minister Human rights LGBT LGBT history Law enforcement Military Parliament Political parties President Security and intelligence Economy Brands Energy Kuna (currency) National Bank Privatization Stock Exchange Telecommunications Tourism Transport Society Demographics Croats Women Education Ethnic groups Healthcare Languages Religion Culture Architecture Art Cinema Cuisine Croatian language Literature Music Public holidays Radio stations Sport Television Symbols Anthem Coat of arms Costume Decorations Flags national flag Interlace Motto Name Outline Index Category Portal WikiProject v t e Languages of Croatia Official languages Croatian Minority languages Czech Hungarian Italian Ruthenian Serbian Slovakian Sign languages Yugoslav Sign Language See Also: Minority languages of Croatia v t e Languages of Bosnia and Herzegovina Official languages Bosnian Croatian Serbian Minority languages Albanian Czech German Hungarian Italian Ladino Macedonian Montenegrin Polish Romanian Rusyn Slovak Slovene Turkish Ukrainian Yiddish Sign languages Yugoslav Sign Language v t e Languages of Serbia Official language Serbian Regional languages Albanian Bosnian Croatian Hungarian Slovak Romanian Rusyn Sign languages Yugoslav Sign Language See Also: Minority languages of Serbia v t e Slavic languages History Proto-Balto-Slavic up to Proto-Slavic Proto-Slavic (accent) Old Church Slavonic modern languages Cyril and Methodius Cyrillic script Glagolitic alphabet West Czech Kashubian Knaanic Polabian Middle Polish Old Polish Polish Pomeranian Slovak Slovincian Lower Sorbian Upper Sorbian East Belarusian Iazychie Old East Slavic Old Novgorodian Russian Rusyn Ruthenian Ukrainian South Bulgarian Macedonian Serbo-Croatian Bosnian Croatian Montenegrin Serbian Slovene Constructed languages Church Slavonic Pan-Slavic language Interslavic Slovio Slavonic-Serbian Separate dialects and Slavic microlanguages Balachka Banat Bulgarian Burgenland Croatian Carpathian Rusyn Canadian Ukrainian Chakavian Cieszyn Silesian Czechoslovak Eastern Slovak Kajkavian Lach Lesser Polish Masovian Masurian Moravian Molise Croatian Pannonian Rusyn Podhale Prekmurian Resian Shtokavian Silesian Slavic dialects of Greece Surzhyk Torlakian Trasianka West Polesian Linguistics Slavic first palatalization Slavic second palatalization Slavic liquid metathesis and pleophony Dybo's law Havlík's law Hirt's law Illič-Svityč's law Ivšić's law Meillet's law Pedersen's law Ruki sound law Winter's law Italics indicate extinct languages. v t e Languages of Europe Sovereign states Albania Andorra Armenia Austria Azerbaijan Belarus Belgium Bosnia and Herzegovina Bulgaria Croatia Cyprus Czech Republic Denmark Estonia Finland France Georgia Germany Greece Hungary Iceland Ireland Italy Kazakhstan Latvia Liechtenstein Lithuania Luxembourg Macedonia Malta Moldova Monaco Montenegro Netherlands Norway Poland Portugal Romania Russia San Marino Serbia Slovakia Slovenia Spain Sweden Switzerland Turkey Ukraine United Kingdom Vatican City States with limited recognition Abkhazia Kosovo Nagorno-Karabakh Republic Northern Cyprus South Ossetia Transnistria Dependencies and other territories Åland Faroe Islands Gibraltar Guernsey Jersey Isle of Man Svalbard Other entities European Union Authority control LCCN: sh00003107 GND: 4033245-7 BNF: cb13573183d (data) BNE: XX540078 Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Croatian_language&oldid=714476342" Categories: Croatian language Languages of Croatia Languages of Bosnia and Herzegovina Languages of Serbia Languages of Vojvodina Languages of Austria Languages of Hungary Languages of Molise Languages of Italy Languages of Slovenia Hidden categories: Language articles citing Ethnologue 18 CS1 Czech-language sources (cs) Pages using citations with accessdate and no URL Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from July 2014 CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list CS1 Serbo-Croatian-language sources (sh) Articles containing Serbo-Croatian-language text Language articles with old Ethnologue 18 speaker data Languages with ISO 639-2 code Languages with ISO 639-1 code Articles including recorded pronunciations Articles containing Croatian-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from October 2010 Articles with unsourced statements from December 2010 Wikipedia articles in need of updating from August 2014 All articles with failed verification Articles with failed verification from August 2014 CS1 German-language sources (de) Commons category with local link same as on Wikidata Wikipedia articles with LCCN identifiers Wikipedia articles with GND identifiers Wikipedia articles with BNF identifiers Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Article Talk Variants Views Read Edit View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Featured content Current events Random article Donate to Wikipedia Wikipedia store Interaction Help About Wikipedia Community portal Recent changes Contact page Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Cite this page Print/export Create a book Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikibooks Wikivoyage Languages Afrikaans Akan Alemannisch አማርኛ Ænglisc Аҧсшәа العربية Aragonés Arpetan Asturianu Avañe'ẽ Авар Azərbaycanca বাংলা Bân-lâm-gú Башҡортса Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца)‎ Български Boarisch Bosanski Brezhoneg Català Чӑвашла Cebuano Čeština Corsu Cymraeg Dansk Deitsch Deutsch Dolnoserbski Eesti Ελληνικά Эрзянь Español Esperanto Estremeñu Euskara فارسی Fiji Hindi Føroyskt Français Frysk Furlan Gaeilge Gaelg Gagauz Gàidhlig Galego ગુજરાતી 客家語/Hak-kâ-ngî Хальмг 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hornjoserbsce Hrvatski Ido Ilokano Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Interlingue Ирон IsiZulu Íslenska Italiano עברית Basa Jawa Kapampangan Къарачай-малкъар ქართული Kaszëbsczi Қазақша Kernowek Kinyarwanda Kiswahili Коми Kurdî Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvių Ligure Limburgs Lingála Lumbaart Magyar Македонски Malti मराठी Bahasa Melayu Мокшень Монгол Nāhuatl Dorerin Naoero Nederlands 日本語 Napulitano Нохчийн Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Nouormand Novial Occitan Олык марий Oʻzbekcha/ўзбекча پنجابی Перем Коми Piemontèis Tok Pisin Plattdüütsch Polski Português Qaraqalpaqsha Qırımtatarca Română Runa Simi Русиньскый Русский Sámegiella Gagana Samoa Sardu Scots Seeltersk Shqip Sicilianu Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Словѣньскъ / ⰔⰎⰑⰂⰡⰐⰠⰔⰍⰟ Ślůnski Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் Татарча/tatarça ไทย Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Türkmençe Удмурт Українська اردو ئۇيغۇرچە / Uyghurche Vèneto Vepsän kel’ Tiếng Việt Volapük Võro Walon ייִדיש Yorùbá 粵語 Zazaki Zeêuws Žemaitėška 中文 Edit links This page was last modified on 10 April 2016, at 00:20. Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view