Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to: navigation, search Not to be confused with Bosnia and Herzegovina or the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina. Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina Federacija Bosne i Hercegovine Федерација Босне и Херцеговине Location of the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina (yellow) within Bosnia and Herzegovina. Brčko District is shown in pale green.a Capital and largest city Sarajevo 43°52′N 18°25′W﻿ / ﻿43.867°N 18.417°W﻿ / 43.867; -18.417 Official languages[1] Bosnian Croatian Serbian Government Parliamentary system  •  President Marinko Čavara  •  Prime Minister Fadil Novalić Formation  •  Washington Agreement 18 March 1994   •  Recognized 14 December 1995  Area  •  Total 26,110.5 km2 10,085 sq mi Population  •  2013 estimate 2,371,603[2]  •  Density 91/km2 233/sq mi Currency Convertible mark (BAM) Time zone CET (UTC+1)  •  Summer (DST) CEST (UTC+2) Calling code +387 a. Formally, Brčko District is held in condominium by both parts of Bosnia and Herzegovina (namely, the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina and Republika Srpska). De facto, however, it is a third entity, as it has the same powers as the Federation and Republika Srpska and is under the direct sovereignty of BiH.[3][4] The Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina (Bosnian, Croatian and Serbian: Federacija Bosne i Hercegovine, Cyrillic script: Федерација Босне и Херцеговине; pronounced [federǎːt͡sija bôsneː i xěrt͡segoʋineː] ( listen)) is one of the two political entities that compose Bosnia and Herzegovina, the other being Republika Srpska. The Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina consists of 10 autonomous cantons having their own governments. It is inhabited primarily by Bosniaks and Bosnian Croats, which is why it is sometimes informally referred to as the Bosniak-Croat Federation (with the Bosnian Serbs as the third constituency of the entity). It is sometimes known by the shorter name Federation of B&H (Federacija BiH). The Federation was created by the 1994 Washington Agreement, which ended the part of the conflict whereby Bosnian Croats fought with Bosniaks. It established a constituent assembly that continued its work until October 1996. The Federation has a capital, government, president, parliament, customs and police departments, two postal systems and an airline (BH Airlines). It had its own army, the Army of the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina, which was merged with the Army of the Republika Srpska to form the Armed Forces of Bosnia and Herzegovina. The capital and largest city and its metropolis is Sarajevo with 438,443[5] inhabitants and the total population of 688,354 in its metropolitan area. Contents 1 History 1.1 Bosnian War 1.2 Washington Agreement 2 Geography 2.1 Boundary 3 Politics 3.1 Political division 4 Economy 5 Demographics 6 Symbols 7 Gallery 8 See also 9 Notes 10 References 11 Bibliography 12 External links History[edit] This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (July 2012) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) Bosnian War[edit] Main articles: Bosnian War and Croat–Bosniak War The Serb-dominated Yugoslav People's Army attacked Croatia from Bosnia and Herzegovina.[6] Their first target was Croatian village Ravno that was attacked on 2 November 1991 and completely destroyed.[6] Yugoslavia effected an economic blockade of Bosnia and Herzegovina, thus trying to keep it as part of Yugoslavia.[7] Later, Yugoslavia claimed territory of Bosnia and Herzegovina with a Serb majority and the capital Sarajevo.[7] Serb Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina was declared on 27 March 1992 with the goal to incorporate parts of Bosnia and Herzegovina into Yugoslavia. The objective of Serbian politics in Bosnia and Herzegovina was to unite Serbian autonomous provinces into a single unit that would join Yugoslavia, and with total blockade of Sarajevo, break Bosnia and Herzegovina into smaller, unconnected and hardly defensible enclaves. Because of superiority in armaments, support from Belgrade and an embargo on the importation of arms into Bosnia and Herzegovina, the Serbs achieved their goals by June 1992. The Bosniak leadership was still indecisive concerning a major conflict, so the Croats were the first to participate in the war. They organized military units, Croatian Defence Forces (HOS) in November 1991 and the Croatian Defence Council in April 1992. Those units were partly composed of Bosniaks. The Territorial Defence of Bosnia and Herzegovina, later Army of the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina effectively organized in autumn of 1992. In Serb-controlled areas, Serbs performed mass murders, ethnic cleansing of non-Serbs, primarily Bosniaks and Croats, established concentration camps and destroyed Bosniak and Croat cultural inheritance. By November 1992 Serbs had conquered 70% of the territory of Bosnia and Herzegovina and held Sarajevo in limbo by terrorizing its population by shelling and constant sniper fire. Relationship between Bosnians and Croats during the war. The existing diversity was increased because of the chaos and the war, but also because of conflicting views and moves by individual leaders of both sides and the United Nations. The creation of a Croatian Republic of Herzeg-Bosnia was a matter of dispute for Bosniaks. Croats accused Bosniaks of Islamization of the country and attempts to create Bosniak domination in all areas. So they withdrew Croat representatives from Parliament, Government and the Presidency. The war in Bosnia and Herzegovina had catastrophic consequences, primarily because of disrupted relations between nationalities and religious communities. Due to Serbian expulsion, Bosniaks moved to other areas and thus disrupted the Croats' area and altered their pre-war ratio. Political disputes and minor incidents in central and northern Bosnia and in northern and central Herzegovina led to Croat-Bosniak War in November 1992. The Vance-Owen plan was presented in January 1993. It was planned to create 10 cantons on the territory of the whole of Bosnia and Herzegovina. This plan increased conflict between Croats and Bosniaks. The Army of the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina (ARBiH) launched four offensives and conquered a large area which was under control of HVO; almost the whole Central Bosnia (except Novi Travnik, Vitez, Busovača, Kiseljak, Kreševo and Žepče and the wider areas around those towns and Usora, part of Municipality of Travnik, Zavidovići and part of Municipality of Vareš) and part of Herzegovina, Konjic, Jablanica and eastern and northern parts of Mostar. A number of crimes against civilians were committed on both sides. Hostility between Croats and Bosniaks ended with mediation by the United States and the signing of theWashington Agreement on 18 March 1994. The cooperation between Croats and Bosniaks was renewed, and the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina, a Bosniak and Croat controlled area was established. There was also a proposal to create a confederation of Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina and Republic of Croatia. The joint command of ARBiH, HVO and Croatian Army (HV) was established in March 1995. The closer cooperation between Croats and Bosniaks was made through the Split Agreement where Bosnia and Herzegovina's Muslim leaders allowed the Croatian Army to free western part of Bosnia and Herzegovina with cooperation with ARBiH. After the Operation Storm, the Serbian hoop around Bihać was broken and Croatian and Bosnian armies continued to liberate western Bosnia. The UN unsuccessfully tried to establish peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina by trying to create a successful structure for Bosnia and Herzegovina. The UN showed a total inability when Serbs conquered UN-protected towns, Srebrenica and Žepa. The Serbs also launched an attack on the UN-protected town of Bihać, but they were stopped by the Croatian army during Operation Storm. Joint Croatian-Bosnian military successes made peace negotiations possible. Washington Agreement[edit] Main article: Washington Agreement The Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina was formed by the Washington Agreement of March 1994. Under the agreement, the combined territory held by the Army of the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina and the Croatian Defence Council forces was divided into ten autonomous cantons. The cantonal system was selected to prevent dominance by one ethnic group over another. In 1995, Bosnian government forces and Bosnian Croat forces of the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina defeated forces of the Autonomous Province of Western Bosnia, and this territory was added to the federation. By the Dayton Agreement of 1995, the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina was defined as one of the two entities of Bosnia and Herzegovina and comprised 51% of the federation area. The Republika Srpska comprised the other 49%. On 8 March 2000, the Brčko District was formed as an autonomous entity within Bosnia and Herzegovina and it was created from part of the territory of both Bosnian entities. Brčko District is now a shared territory that belongs to both entities. Geography[edit] Boundary[edit] The Inter-Entity Boundary Line (IEBL) that distinguishes Bosnia and Herzegovina's two entities essentially runs along the military front lines as they existed at the end of the Bosnian War, with adjustments (most importantly in the western part of the country and around Sarajevo), as defined by the Dayton Agreement. The total length of the IEBL is approximately 1,080 km. The IEBL is an administrative demarcation and not controlled by the military or police and there is free movement across it. Five of the cantons (Una-Sana, Tuzla, Zenica-Doboj, Bosnian Podrinje and Sarajevo) are Bosniak majority cantons, three (Posavina, West Herzegovina and Canton 10) are Croat majority cantons, and two (Central Bosnia and Herzegovina-Neretva) are 'ethnically mixed', meaning there are special legislative procedures for protection of the constituent ethnic groups. A significant portion of Brčko District was also part of the Federation; however, when the district was created, it became shared territory of both entities, but it was not placed under control of either of the two, and is hence under direct jurisdiction of Bosnia-Herzegovina. Currently the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina has 79 municipalities. Politics[edit] The government and politics of the Federation are dominated by two large parties, the Bosniak Party of Democratic Action (Stranka demokratske akcije, SDA) and the Croatian Democratic Union of Bosnia and Herzegovina (Hrvatska demokratska zajednica, HDZ).[8] In September 2010, the International Crisis Group warned that "disputes among and between Bosniak and Croat leaders and a dysfunctional administrative system have paralysed decision-making, put the entity on the verge of bankruptcy and triggered social unrest".[8] Political division[edit] Main article: Cantons of the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina Una-Sana Posavina Tuzla Zenica-Doboj Bosnian Podrinje Central Bosnia Herzegovina- -Neretva West Herzegovina Sarajevo Canton 10 Republika Srpska Republika Srpska Brčko The Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina comprises ten cantons (Bosnian: kantoni Croatian: županije): No. Canton Center No. Canton Center 1 Una-Sana Bihać 6 Central Bosnia Travnik 2 Posavina Orašje 7 Herzegovina-Neretva Mostar 3 Tuzla Tuzla 8 West Herzegovina Široki Brijeg 4 Zenica-Doboj Zenica 9 Sarajevo Sarajevo 5 Bosnian Podrinje Goražde 10 Canton 10 Livno Economy[edit] This section is empty. You can help by adding to it. (April 2015) Demographics[edit] Ethnic composition in 1991 The Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina comprises 51% of the land area of Bosnia and Herzegovina, and is home to 62.1% of the country's total population.[9] All data dealing with population, including ethnic distributions, are subject to considerable error because of the lack of official census figures. Year Bosniaks % Croats % Serbs % Yugoslavs % Others % Total 1991 1,423,593 52.3% 594,362 21.9% 478,122 17.6% 161,938 5.9% 62,059 2.3% 2,720,074   v t e Largest cities or towns in the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina 2013 Census[10] Rank Canton Pop. Rank Canton Pop. Sarajevo Tuzla 1 Sarajevo Sarajevo Canton 438,443 11 Sanski Most Una-Sana Canton 47,359 Zenica Mostar 2 Tuzla Tuzla Canton 120,441 12 Lukavac Tuzla Canton 46,731 3 Zenica Zenica-Doboj Canton 115,134 13 Tešanj Zenica-Doboj Canton 46,135 4 Mostar Herzegovina-Neretva Canton 113,169 14 Velika Kladuša Una-Sana Canton 44,770 5 Ilidža Sarajevo Canton 71,892 15 Srebrenik Tuzla Canton 42,762 6 Cazin Una-Sana Canton 69,411 16 Gradačac Tuzla Canton 41,836 7 Živinice Tuzla Canton 61,201 17 Visoko Zenica-Doboj Canton 41,352 8 Bihać Una-Sana Canton 61,186 18 Zavidovići Zenica-Doboj Canton 40,272 9 Travnik Central Bosnia Canton 57 543 19 Kakanj Zenica-Doboj Canton 38,937 10 Gračanica, Bosnia and Herzegovina Tuzla Canton 48,395 20 Livno Canton 10 37,487 Symbols[edit] Former flag of the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina The Flag of the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina and Coat of arms of the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina have been deemed unconstitutional by the Constitutional Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina and were due to be replaced by September. On 31 March 2007, the Constitutional Court placed its decision into the "Official Gazette of Bosnia and Herzegovina" officially removing them.[11] The federation has not yet adopted a new anthem or coat of arms, but uses the symbols of the central state as a provisional solution.[12] Gallery[edit] Počitelj, old town near Mostar Stari Most (Old Bridge) in Mostar Sarajevo, view from the east Pliva Waterfall Troglav Vrelo Bosne See also[edit] Bosnia and Herzegovina Republika Srpska Political divisions of Bosnia and Herzegovina History of Bosnia and Herzegovina History of Croatia Notes[edit] References[edit] ^ Constitution of the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina. Official Gazette of the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina. ^ "First release" (PDF). Federal Office of Statistics, Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina. June 30, 2011.  ^ Office of High Representative in Bosnia and Herzegovina Archived 18 November 2006 at the Wayback Machine. ^ Office of High Representative in Bosnia and Herzegovina Archived 10 March 2007 at the Wayback Machine. ^ http://www.bhas.ba/obavjestenja/Preliminarni_rezultati_bos.pdf ^ a b Human Rights Watch 1999, p. 17. ^ a b Human Rights Watch 1999, p. 18. ^ a b "Federation of Bosnia And Herzegovina – A Parallel Crisis". International Crisis Group. 28 September 2010.  ^ "POPULATION OF THE FEDERATION BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA 1996 - 2006" (PDF). Federal Office of Statistics.  ^ "Census of Population, Households and Dwellings in Bosnia and Herzegovina 2013" (PDF). Federal Bureau of Statistics. Retrieved 3 April 2015.  ^ "30th Plenary session". Constitutional Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina.  ^ Reuters (16 July 2008). "Muslim Outcry Over Bosnian Serbs `State` Symbols". Dalje.  Bibliography[edit] Human Rights Watch (1999). War Crimes in Bosnia-Hercegovina. Human Rights Watch. ISBN 1-56432-083-9.  External links[edit] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina. Website of the Federation Government Parliament of the Federation Constitution of the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina Website for persons unaccounted for in connection with the conflict on the territory of Bosnia and Herzegovina, International Committee of the Red Cross. BalkanInsight - Future of Bosnia and Hercegovina v t e Political divisions of Bosnia and Herzegovina v t e Entities of Bosnia and Herzegovina Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina Republika Srpska v t e Cantons of the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina      Una-Sana  Central Bosnia  Posavina  Herzegovina-Neretva  Tuzla  West Herzegovina  Zenica-Doboj  Sarajevo  Bosnian Podrinje  Canton 10 v t e Districts of Bosnia and Herzegovina Brčko distrikt v t e Municipalities and cities in Bosnia and Herzegovina Capital Sarajevo Municipalities and cities of the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina Cities Grad Bihać Grad Mostar Glavni grad Sarajevo Grad Široki Brijeg Grad Tuzla Grad Zenica Municipalities Banovići Bosanska Krupa Bosanski Petrovac Bosansko Grahovo Breza Bugojno Busovača Bužim Čapljina Cazin Čelić Centar, Sarajevo Čitluk Drvar Doboj East Doboj South Dobratići Domaljevac-Šamac Donji Vakuf Foča-Ustikolina Fojnica Glamoč Goražde Gornji Vakuf-Uskoplje Gračanica Gradačac Grude Hadžići Ilidža Ilijaš Jablanica Jajce Kakanj Kalesija Kiseljak Kladanj Ključ Konjic Kreševo Kupres Livno Ljubuški Lukavac Maglaj Neum Novi Grad, Sarajevo Novo Sarajevo Novi Travnik Odžak Olovo Orašje Pale-Prača Posušje Prozor-Rama Ravno Sanski Most Sapna Srebrenik Stari Grad, Sarajevo Stolac Teočak Tešanj Tomislavgrad Travnik Trnovo (FBiH) Usora Vareš Velika Kladuša Visoko Vitez Vogošća Zavidovići Žepče Živinice Municipalities and cities of Republika Srpska Cities Grad Banja Luka Grad Bijeljina Grad Doboj Grad Istočno Sarajevo Grad Prijedor Grad Trebinje Municipalities Berkovići Bileća Brod Bratunac Čajniče Čelinac Derventa Donji Žabar Foča Gacko Gradiška Han Pijesak Istočni Drvar Istočna Ilidža Istočni Mostar Istočni Stari Grad Istočno Novo Sarajevo Jezero Kalinovik Kneževo Kostajnica Kozarska Dubica Kotor Varoš Krupa na Uni Kupres Laktaši Ljubinje Lopare Milići Modriča Mrkonjić Grad Nevesinje Novi Grad Novo Goražde Osmaci Oštra Luka Pale Pelagićevo Petrovac Petrovo Prnjavor Ribnik Rogatica Rudo Stanari Šamac Šekovići Šipovo Sokolac Srbac Srebrenica Teslić Trnovo Ugljevik Višegrad Vlasenica Vukosavlje Zvornik Brčko District Brčko v t e Bosnian War Part of the Yugoslav Wars Prelude Karađorđevo agreement Karadžić–Filipović agreement RAM Plan SAO Bosanska Krajina Manjača camp SAO Herzegovina SAO North-Eastern Bosnia SAO Romanija Republika Srpska Bosnia and Herzegovina independence referendum Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina 1992 Battle of Bosanski Brod Sijekovac killings Bijeljina massacre Batković concentration camp Battle of Kupres Siege of Sarajevo Foča massacres Siege of Srebrenica Zvornik massacre Doboj Snagovo massacre Prijedor massacre Sarajevo column incident Graz agreement Glogova massacre Lašva Valley ethnic cleansing Tuzla column incident Zaklopača massacre Vilina Vlas Liplje camp Luka camp Omarska camp Keraterm camp Trnopolje camp Sušica camp Čelebići camp Bijeli Potok massacre Dretelj camp Uzamnica camp Operation Jackal Višegrad massacres (Barimo Bosanska Jagodina Paklenik Sjeverin) Čemerno massacre Siege of Bihać Ahatovići massacre Croat–Bosniak War Operation Vrbas '92 Operation Corridor  Croatian Republic of Herzeg-Bosnia Agreement on Friendship and Cooperation between Bosnia and Herzegovina and Croatia Korićani Cliffs massacre Heliodrom camp 1993 Kravica attack Duša killings Štrpci Siege of Mostar Ahmići massacre Trusina killings Sovići massacre Dobrinja mortar attack Battle of Žepče Gabela camp Vojno camp Operation Neretva '93 Grabovica massacre Mokronoge massacre Stupni Do massacre Autonomous Province of Western Bosnia Operation Deny Flight Križančevo Selo killings 1994 Tvigi 94 First Markale massacre Banja Luka incident Washington Agreement  Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina Operation Bøllebank Operation Tiger Battle of Kupres Operation Amanda Operation Spider Operation Winter '94 1995 Operation Leap 1 Battle of Orašje Operation Leap 2 Split Agreement Operation Summer '95 Tuzla massacre Srebrenica massacre (Kravica Children) Battle for Vozuća Operation Storm Second Markale massacre NATO bombing campaign Operation Mistral 2 Operation Sana Operation Una Operation Southern Move Dayton Agreement  Bosnia and Herzegovina Aspects Genocide Ethnic cleansing Rape Peace plans Foreign fighters Timeline of the Bosnian War (Timeline of the Croat–Bosniak War) Category Commons Authority control WorldCat Identities VIAF: 125452751 GND: 4584229-2 Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Federation_of_Bosnia_and_Herzegovina&oldid=714454591" Categories: Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina Balkans Entities of Bosnia and Herzegovina Subdivisions of Bosnia and Herzegovina Bosnian-speaking countries and territories Croatian-speaking countries and territories Serbian-speaking countries and territories 1994 establishments in Bosnia and Herzegovina States and territories established in 1994 Regions of Europe with multiple official languages Hidden categories: Use dmy dates from August 2013 Articles containing Bosnian-language text Articles needing additional references from July 2012 All articles needing additional references Articles to be expanded from April 2015 All articles to be expanded Articles with empty sections from April 2015 All articles with empty sections Articles using small message boxes Commons category with page title same as on Wikidata Wikipedia articles with VIAF identifiers Wikipedia articles with GND identifiers Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Article Talk Variants Views Read Edit View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Featured content Current events Random article Donate to Wikipedia Wikipedia store Interaction Help About Wikipedia Community portal Recent changes Contact page Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Cite this page Print/export Create a book Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Languages العربية Asturianu Azərbaycanca Български Bosanski Català Cebuano Čeština Deutsch Dolnoserbski Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Interlingue Italiano עברית Basa Jawa ქართული Қазақша Latina Lietuvių Magyar Македонски Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Occitan Piemontèis Polski Português Română Русский Scots Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links This page was last modified on 9 April 2016, at 21:20. Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view