List of sovereign states - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia List of sovereign states From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia   (Redirected from Countries of the world) Jump to: navigation, search "List of nations" and "List of countries" redirect here. For other country lists, see Lists of countries and territories. For non-sovereign dependencies, see Dependent territory. This list of sovereign states provides an overview of sovereign states around the world, with information on their status and recognition of their sovereignty. Membership within the United Nations system divides the 206 listed states into three categories: 193 member states,[1] two observer states, and 11 other states. The sovereignty dispute column indicates states whose sovereignty is undisputed (190 states) and states whose sovereignty is disputed (16 states). Compiling a list such as this can be a difficult and controversial process, as there is no definition that is binding on all the members of the community of nations concerning the criteria for statehood. For more information on the criteria used to determine the contents of this list, please see the criteria for inclusion section below. The list is intended to include entities that have been recognized to have de facto status as sovereign states, and inclusion should not be seen as an endorsement of any specific claim to statehood in legal terms. Contents 1 List of states 2 Criteria for inclusion 3 See also 4 Notes 5 References 6 Bibliography List of states Short and formal names Membership within the UN System [Note 1] Sovereignty dispute [Note 2] Further information on status and recognition of sovereignty [Note 3] A AAA A AAA A AAA ZZZ↓ UN member states or observer states ↓ A AAA ZZZ ZZZAbkhazia → Abkhazia A UN member state A None  Afghanistan – Islamic Republic of Afghanistan A UN member state A None  Albania – Republic of Albania A UN member state A None  Algeria – People's Democratic Republic of Algeria A UN member state A None  Andorra – Principality of Andorra A UN member state A None Andorra is a co-principality in which the office of head of state is jointly held ex officio by the French president and the bishop of the Roman Catholic diocese of Urgell,[2] who himself is appointed by the Holy See.  Angola – Republic of Angola A UN member state A None  Antigua and Barbuda A UN member state A None Antigua and Barbuda is a Commonwealth realm[Note 4] with 1 autonomous region, Barbuda.[Note 5][3]  Argentina – Argentine Republic[Note 6] A UN member state A None Argentina is a federation of 23 provinces and 1 autonomous city.  Armenia – Republic of Armenia A UN member state Not recognized by Pakistan[4][5][6] See Armenia–Pakistan relations and Nagorno-Karabakh conflict.  Australia – Commonwealth of Australia A UN member state A None Australia is a Commonwealth realm[Note 4] and a federation of six states and 10 territories. The external territories of Australia are:  Ashmore and Cartier Islands  Australian Antarctic Territory  Christmas Island  Cocos (Keeling) Islands  Coral Sea Islands Territory  Heard Island and McDonald Islands  Norfolk Island  Austria – Republic of Austria A UN member state A None Member of the European Union.[a] Austria is a federation of nine states (Bundesländer).  Azerbaijan – Republic of Azerbaijan A UN member state A None Azerbaijan contains two autonomous regions, Nakhchivan and Nagorno-Karabakh (Dağlıq Qarabağ).[Note 5] In Nagorno-Karabakh, a de facto state has been established.  Bahamas, The – Commonwealth of the Bahamas A UN member state A None The Bahamas is a Commonwealth realm.[Note 4]  Bahrain – Kingdom of Bahrain A UN member state A None  Bangladesh – People's Republic of Bangladesh A UN member state A None  Barbados A UN member state A None Barbados is a Commonwealth realm.[Note 4]  Belarus – Republic of Belarus A UN member state A None Belarus forms the Union State jointly with Russia.  Belgium – Kingdom of Belgium A UN member state A None Member of the EU.[a] Belgium is a federation divided into linguistic communities and regions.  Belize A UN member state A None Belize is a Commonwealth realm.[Note 4]  Benin – Republic of Benin[Note 7] A UN member state A None  Bhutan – Kingdom of Bhutan A UN member state A None  Bolivia – Plurinational State of Bolivia A UN member state A None  Bosnia and Herzegovina A UN member state A None Bosnia and Herzegovina is a federation of two constituent units:  Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina  Republika Srpska and Brčko District, a self-governing administrative unit.[8]  Botswana – Republic of Botswana A UN member state A None  Brazil – Federative Republic of Brazil A UN member state A None Brazil is a federation of 26 states and 1 federal district.  Brunei – Nation of Brunei, Abode of Peace A UN member state A None  Bulgaria – Republic of Bulgaria A UN member state A None Member of the EU.[a]  Burkina Faso[Note 8] A UN member state A None Burma → Myanmar A UN member state A None  Burundi – Republic of Burundi A UN member state A None  Cambodia – Kingdom of Cambodia A UN member state A None  Cameroon – Republic of Cameroon A UN member state A None  Canada[Note 9] A UN member state A None Canada is a Commonwealth realm[Note 4] and a federation of 10 provinces and three territories.  Cape Verde – Republic of Cabo Verde A UN member state A None  Central African Republic A UN member state A None  Chad – Republic of Chad A UN member state A None  Chile – Republic of Chile A UN member state A None Chile has two "special territories" in the Valparaíso Region:  Easter Island  Juan Fernández Islands  China – People's Republic of China[Note 10] A UN member state Partially unrecognized. B Claimed by Georgia Claimed by North Korea Claimed by Serbia Claimed by Somalia Claimed by the People's Republic of China Claimed by the Republic of China Claimed by South Korea Claimed by Azerbaijan Claimed by the Republic of Cyprus Disputed by Israel Claimed by Morocco Claimed by Moldova Claimed by Mali The People's Republic of China (PRC) contains five autonomous regions, Guangxi, Inner Mongolia, Ningxia, Xinjiang and Tibet.[Note 5] Additionally, it has sovereignty over the Special Administrative Regions of:  Hong Kong  Macau China is not recognised by 21 UN member states and the Holy See, which instead recognise Taiwan (the Republic of China).[Note 11] China claims, but does not control, Taiwan which is governed by a rival administration.[Note 12] China controls part of the territory of Kashmir, which is disputed by India and Pakistan. China, Republic of → Taiwan A UN member state A None  Colombia – Republic of Colombia A UN member state A None  Comoros – Union of the Comoros A UN member state A None Comoros is a federation of 3 islands.[Note 13][9]  Congo, Democratic Republic of the[Note 14] A UN member state A None  Congo, Republic of the[Note 15] A UN member state A None ZZZCook Islands → Cook Islands A UN member state A None  Costa Rica – Republic of Costa Rica A UN member state A None Côte d'Ivoire → Ivory Coast A UN member state A None  Croatia – Republic of Croatia A UN member state A None Member of the EU.[a]  Cuba – Republic of Cuba A UN member state A None  Cyprus – Republic of Cyprus A UN member state Not recognized by Turkey[10] Member of the EU.[a] The northeastern part of the island is the de facto state of Northern Cyprus. See Foreign relations of Cyprus and Cyprus dispute. Turkey refers to the Republic of Cyprus government as "The Greek Cypriot Administration of Southern Cyprus".[11]  Czech Republic[Note 16] A UN member state A None Member of the EU.[a] Democratic People's Republic of Korea → Korea, North A UN member state A None Democratic Republic of the Congo → Congo, Democratic Republic of the A UN member state A None  Denmark – Kingdom of Denmark A UN member state A None Member of the EU.[a] The Danish Realm includes two self-governing territories:  Faroe Islands (Føroyar/Færøerne)  Greenland (Kalaallit Nunaat/Grønland) The designation "Denmark" can refer either to one of the Kingdom's constituent countries or to the short name for the Kingdom (e.g. in international organizations). The Kingdom of Denmark as a whole is a member of the EU, but EU law does not apply to the Faroe Islands and Greenland.  Djibouti – Republic of Djibouti A UN member state A None  Dominica – Commonwealth of Dominica A UN member state A None  Dominican Republic A UN member state A None  East Timor – Democratic Republic of Timor-Leste[Note 17] A UN member state A None  Ecuador – Republic of Ecuador A UN member state A None  Egypt – Arab Republic of Egypt A UN member state A None  El Salvador – Republic of El Salvador A UN member state A None  Equatorial Guinea – Republic of Equatorial Guinea A UN member state A None  Eritrea – State of Eritrea A UN member state A None  Estonia – Republic of Estonia A UN member state A None Member of the EU.[a]  Ethiopia – Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia A UN member state A None Ethiopia is a federation of nine regions and two chartered cities.  Federated States of Micronesia A UN member state A None Under Compact of Free Association with the United States. The Federated States of Micronesia is a federation of four states.  Fiji – Republic of Fiji A UN member state A None Fiji contains 1 autonomous region, Rotuma.[Note 5][12][13]  Finland – Republic of Finland A UN member state A None Member of the EU.[a]  Åland is a neutral and demilitarised autonomous region of Finland.[Note 5][Note 18]  France – French Republic A UN member state A None Member of the EU.[a] France contains five overseas regions/departments: French Guiana, Guadeloupe, Martinique, Mayotte, and Réunion. France also includes the overseas territories of:  Clipperton Island  French Polynesia  New Caledonia  Saint Barthélemy  Saint Martin  Saint Pierre and Miquelon  Wallis and Futuna  French Southern and Antarctic Lands  Gabon – Gabonese Republic A UN member state A None Gambia  Gambia, The – Islamic Republic of the Gambia A UN member state A None  Georgia A UN member state A None Georgia contains two autonomous republics, Adjara and Abkhazia.[Note 5] In Abkhazia and South Ossetia, de facto states have been formed.  Germany – Federal Republic of Germany A UN member state A None Member of the EU.[a] Germany is a federation of 16 federated states (Länder).  Ghana – Republic of Ghana A UN member state A None  Greece – Hellenic Republic A UN member state A None Member of the EU.[a] Mount Athos is an autonomous part of Greece that is jointly governed by the multinational "Holy Community" on the mountain and a civil governor appointed by the Greek government.[14]  Grenada A UN member state A None Grenada is a Commonwealth realm.[Note 4]  Guatemala – Republic of Guatemala A UN member state A None  Guinea – Republic of Guinea[Note 19] A UN member state A None  Guinea-Bissau – Republic of Guinea-Bissau A UN member state A None  Guyana – Co-operative Republic of Guyana A UN member state A None  Haiti – Republic of Haiti A UN member state A None Holy See → Vatican City A UN member state A None  Honduras – Republic of Honduras A UN member state A None  Hungary A UN member state A None Member of the EU.[a]  Iceland[Note 20] A UN member state A None  India – Republic of India A UN member state A None India is a federation of 29 states and seven union territories. India claims the entire territory of Kashmir as one of its states, but only exercises control over part of it, while the rest is controlled by the People's Republic of China and Pakistan.  Indonesia – Republic of Indonesia A UN member state A None Indonesia has five provinces with official special autonomy status: Aceh, Jakarta SCR, Yogyakarta SR, Papua, and West Papua.[Note 5]  Iran – Islamic Republic of Iran A UN member state A None  Iraq – Republic of Iraq A UN member state A None Iraq is a federation[Note 13][15] of 18 governorates, three of which make up the autonomous Iraqi Kurdistan.[Note 5]  Ireland[Note 21] A UN member state A None Member of the EU.[a]  Israel – State of Israel A UN member state Partially unrecognized Israel exerts strong control over the territory claimed by Palestine. Israel annexed East Jerusalem,[17] an annexation not recognised by the international community.[18] Israel maintains varying levels of control over the rest of the West Bank, and although Israel no longer has a permanent civilian or military presence in the Gaza Strip, following its unilateral disengagement, it is still considered by some to be the occupying power under international law.[19][20][21][22][23] Israel is not recognised as a state by 32 UN members (including most Arab states) and by the SADR.  Italy – Italian Republic A UN member state A None Member of the EU.[a] Italy has five autonomous regions, Aosta Valley, Friuli-Venezia Giulia, Sardinia, Sicily and Trentino-Alto Adige/Südtirol.[Note 5]  Ivory Coast – Republic of Côte d'Ivoire A UN member state A None  Jamaica A UN member state A None Jamaica is a Commonwealth realm.[Note 4]  Japan A UN member state A None  Jordan – Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan A UN member state A None  Kazakhstan – Republic of Kazakhstan A UN member state A None  Kenya – Republic of Kenya A UN member state A None  Kiribati – Republic of Kiribati A UN member state A None  Korea, North – Democratic People's Republic of Korea A UN member state B Claimed by Georgia Claimed by North Korea Claimed by Serbia Claimed by Somalia Claimed by the People's Republic of China Claimed by the Republic of China Claimed by South Korea Claimed by Azerbaijan Claimed by the Republic of Cyprus Disputed by Israel Claimed by Morocco Claimed by Moldova Claimed by Mali North Korea is not recognised by two UN members: Japan and South Korea.[Note 22][24]  Korea, South – Republic of Korea A UN member state B Claimed by Georgia Claimed by North Korea Claimed by Serbia Claimed by Somalia Claimed by the People's Republic of China Claimed by the Republic of China Claimed by South Korea Claimed by Azerbaijan Claimed by the Republic of Cyprus Disputed by Israel Claimed by Morocco Claimed by Moldova Claimed by Mali South Korea contains 1 autonomous region, Jeju-do.[Note 5][25] South Korea is not recognised by one UN member: North Korea.[Note 22] ZZZKosovo → Kosovo A UN member state A None  Kuwait – State of Kuwait A UN member state A None  Kyrgyzstan – Kyrgyz Republic A UN member state A None  Laos – Lao People's Democratic Republic A UN member state A None  Latvia – Republic of Latvia A UN member state A None Member of the EU.[a]  Lebanon – Lebanese Republic A UN member state A None  Lesotho – Kingdom of Lesotho A UN member state A None  Liberia – Republic of Liberia A UN member state A None  Libya – State of Libya A UN member state A None Libya has one self-declared autonomous region:[26] Cyrenaica  Liechtenstein – Principality of Liechtenstein A UN member state A None  Lithuania – Republic of Lithuania A UN member state A None Member of the EU.[a]  Luxembourg – Grand Duchy of Luxembourg A UN member state A None Member of the EU.[a]  Macedonia – Republic of Macedonia A UN member state A None Because of the Macedonia naming dispute, the country is referred to by the UN and a number of states and international organizations as "the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia".  Madagascar – Republic of Madagascar A UN member state A None  Malawi – Republic of Malawi A UN member state A None  Malaysia A UN member state A None Malaysia is a federation of 13 states and three federal territories.  Maldives – Republic of Maldives A UN member state A None  Mali – Republic of Mali A UN member state A None  Malta – Republic of Malta A UN member state A None Member of the EU.[a]  Marshall Islands – Republic of the Marshall Islands A UN member state A None Under Compact of Free Association with the United States.  Mauritania – Islamic Republic of Mauritania A UN member state A None  Mauritius – Republic of Mauritius A UN member state A None Mauritius has an autonomous island, Rodrigues.[Note 5]  Mexico – United Mexican States A UN member state A None Mexico is a federation of 31 states and one autonomous city.  Moldova – Republic of Moldova A UN member state A None Moldova has the autonomous regions of Gagauzia and Transnistria, the latter of which has established a de facto state.  Monaco – Principality of Monaco A UN member state A None  Mongolia A UN member state A None  Montenegro A UN member state A None  Morocco – Kingdom of Morocco A UN member state A None Morocco claims sovereignty over Western Sahara and controls most of it, which is disputed by the Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic.  Mozambique – Republic of Mozambique A UN member state A None  Myanmar – Republic of the Union of Myanmar[Note 23][27] A UN member state A None ZZZNagorno-Karabakh → Nagorno-Karabakh A UN member state A None  Namibia – Republic of Namibia A UN member state A None  Nauru – Republic of Nauru A UN member state A None    Nepal – Federal Democratic Republic of Nepal A UN member state A None Nepal is a federation composed of 14 zones.  Netherlands – Kingdom of the Netherlands A UN member state A None Member of the EU.[a] The Kingdom of the Netherlands consists of four constituent countries:  The Netherlands  Aruba  Curaçao  Sint Maarten The monarch and his ministers form the government of the kingdom as well as the government of its constituent country, the Netherlands. Following the dissolution of the Netherlands Antilles in 2010, Curaçao and Sint Maarten have become constituent countries, which, alongside Aruba, enjoy considerable autonomy. The other three islands (Bonaire, Saba, Sint Eustatius) became special municipalities of the constituent country of the Netherlands. The designation "Netherlands" can refer either to one of the Kingdom's constituent countries or to the short name for the Kingdom (e.g. in international organizations). The Kingdom of the Netherlands as a whole is a member of the EU, but EU law applies only to parts within Europe.  New Zealand A UN member state A None New Zealand is a Commonwealth realm,[Note 4] and has the dependent territories of:  Ross Dependency  Tokelau New Zealand has responsibilities for (but no rights of control over) two freely associated states:  Cook Islands  Niue The Cook Islands and Niue have diplomatic relations with 41 and with 17 UN members respectively.[28][29][30] They have full treaty-making capacity in the UN,[31] and are members of some UN specialized agencies.  Nicaragua – Republic of Nicaragua A UN member state A None Nicaragua contains two autonomous regions, Atlántico Sur and Atlántico Norte.[Note 5]  Niger – Republic of Niger A UN member state A None  Nigeria – Federal Republic of Nigeria A UN member state A None Nigeria is a federation of 36 states and 1 federal territory. ZZZNiue → Niue A UN member state A None ZZZNorthern Cyprus → Northern Cyprus A UN member state A None North Korea → Korea, North A UN member state A None  Norway – Kingdom of Norway A UN member state A None Svalbard is an integral part of Norway, but has a special status due to the Svalbard Treaty. Jan Mayen is an island that is an integral part of Norway, although unincorporated. Norway has the dependent territories of: Bouvet Island Peter I Island Queen Maud Land  Oman – Sultanate of Oman A UN member state A None  Pakistan – Islamic Republic of Pakistan A UN member state A None Pakistan is a federation of four provinces, 1 capital territory, and tribal regions. Pakistan disputes the entire territory of Kashmir with India, and part of it with the People's Republic of China. It exercises control over certain portions of Kashmir, but has not officially annexed any of it,[32][33] instead regarding it as a disputed territory.[34][35] The portions that it controls are divided into two territories, administered separately from Pakistan proper:[Note 24]  Azad Kashmir  Gilgit Baltistan Azad Kashmir describes itself as a "self-governing state under Pakistani control", while Gilgit-Baltistan is described in its governance order as a group of "areas" with self-government.[36][37] These territories are not usually regarded as sovereign, as they do not fulfill the criteria set out by the declarative theory of statehood (for example, their current laws do not allow them to engage independently in relations with other states). Several state functions of these territories (such as foreign affairs and defence) are performed by Pakistan on their behalf.[37][38][39]  Palau – Republic of Palau A UN member state A None Under Compact of Free Association with the United States.  Palestine – State of Palestine A UN observer state; member of one UN specialized agency Partially unrecognized. B Claimed by Georgia Claimed by North Korea Claimed by Serbia Claimed by Somalia Claimed by the People's Republic of China Claimed by the Republic of China Claimed by South Korea Claimed by Azerbaijan Claimed by the Republic of Cyprus Disputed by Israel Claimed by Morocco Claimed by Moldova Claimed by Mali The declared State of Palestine has received diplomatic recognition from 136 states.[40] The proclaimed state has no agreed territorial borders, or effective control on much of the territory that it proclaimed.[41] The Palestinian National Authority is an interim administrative body formed as a result of the Oslo Accords that exercises limited autonomous jurisdiction within the Palestinian territories. In foreign relations, Palestine is represented by the Palestine Liberation Organization.[42] The State of Palestine is a member state of UNESCO,[43] and an observer state in the UN.  Panama – Republic of Panama A UN member state A None  Papua New Guinea – Independent State of Papua New Guinea A UN member state A None Papua New Guinea is a Commonwealth realm[Note 4] with 1 autonomous region, Bougainville.[Note 5]  Paraguay – Republic of Paraguay A UN member state A None  Peru – Republic of Peru A UN member state A None  Philippines – Republic of the Philippines A UN member state A None The Philippines contains one autonomous region, Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao.[Note 5]  Poland – Republic of Poland A UN member state A None Member of the EU.[a]  Portugal – Portuguese Republic A UN member state A None Member of the EU.[a] Portugal contains two autonomous regions, Azores and Madeira.[Note 5] Pridnestrovie → Transnistria A UN member state A None  Qatar – State of Qatar A UN member state A None Republic of Korea → Korea, South A UN member state A None Republic of the Congo → Congo, Republic of the A UN member state A None  Romania A UN member state A None Member of the EU.[a]  Russia – Russian Federation A UN member state A None Russia is officially a federation of 85 federal subjects (republics, oblasts, krais, autonomous okrugs, federal cities, and an autonomous oblast). Several of the federal subjects are ethnic republics.[Note 5] Russia also forms the Union State jointly with Belarus.  Rwanda – Republic of Rwanda A UN member state A None ZZZSahrawi Arab Democratic Republic → Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic A UN member state A None  Saint Kitts and Nevis – Federation of Saint Christopher and Nevis A UN member state A None Saint Kitts and Nevis is a Commonwealth realm[Note 4] and is a federation[Note 13] of 14 parishes.  Saint Lucia A UN member state A None Saint Lucia is a Commonwealth realm.[Note 4]  Saint Vincent and the Grenadines A UN member state A None Saint Vincent and the Grenadines is a Commonwealth realm.[Note 4]  Samoa – Independent State of Samoa A UN member state A None  San Marino – Republic of San Marino A UN member state A None  São Tomé and Príncipe – Democratic Republic of São Tomé and Príncipe A UN member state A None São Tomé and Príncipe contains 1 autonomous province, Príncipe.[Note 5]  Saudi Arabia – Kingdom of Saudi Arabia A UN member state A None  Senegal – Republic of Senegal A UN member state A None  Serbia – Republic of Serbia A UN member state A None Serbia contains two autonomous regions, Vojvodina and Kosovo and Metohija.[Note 5] The latter is under the de facto control of the Republic of Kosovo.  Seychelles – Republic of Seychelles A UN member state A None  Sierra Leone – Republic of Sierra Leone A UN member state A None  Singapore – Republic of Singapore A UN member state A None  Slovakia – Slovak Republic A UN member state A None Member of the EU.[a]  Slovenia – Republic of Slovenia A UN member state A None Member of the EU.[a]  Solomon Islands A UN member state A None The Solomon Islands is a Commonwealth realm.[Note 4]  Somalia – Federal Republic of Somalia A UN member state A None Somalia is presently divided with the official Federal Government of Somalia (FGS) controlling only part of the country. Puntland and Galmudug have declared themselves as autonomous regions of Somalia (a claim that the FGS does not recognise),[44][need quotation to verify] while Somaliland has formed an unrecognised de facto state. ZZZSomaliland → Somaliland A UN member state A None  South Africa – Republic of South Africa A UN member state A None South Korea → Korea, South A UN member state A None ZZZSouth Ossetia → South Ossetia A UN member state A None  South Sudan – Republic of South Sudan A UN member state A None South Sudan is a federation of 10 states.  Spain – Kingdom of Spain A UN member state A None Member of the EU.[a] Spain is divided into 17 autonomous communities and 2 special autonomous cities.[Note 5]  Sri Lanka – Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka A UN member state A None Formerly known as Ceylon.  Sudan – Republic of the Sudan A UN member state A None Sudan is a federation of 17 states. Disputes Abyei and Kafia Kingi with South Sudan. ZZZSudan, South → South Sudan A UN member state A None  Suriname – Republic of Suriname A UN member state A None  Swaziland – Kingdom of Swaziland A UN member state A None  Sweden – Kingdom of Sweden A UN member state A None Member of the EU.[a]   Switzerland – Swiss Confederation A UN member state A None Switzerland is a federation of 26 cantons.  Syria – Syrian Arab Republic A UN member state A None The Syrian National Coalition, which is recognized as the legitimate representative of the Syrian people by 20 UN members, has established an interim government to rule rebel controlled territory during the Syrian civil war. Syria has one self-declared autonomous region:  Syrian Kurdistan ZZZTaiwan (Republic of China) → Taiwan A UN member state A None  Tajikistan – Republic of Tajikistan A UN member state A None Tajikistan contains 1 autonomous region, Gorno-Badakhshan Autonomous Province.[Note 5]  Tanzania – United Republic of Tanzania A UN member state A None Tanzania contains 1 autonomous region, Zanzibar.[Note 5]  Thailand – Kingdom of Thailand A UN member state A None Timor-Leste → East Timor A UN member state A None  Togo – Togolese Republic A UN member state A None  Tonga – Kingdom of Tonga A UN member state A None ZZZTransnistria → Transnistria A UN member state A None  Trinidad and Tobago – Republic of Trinidad and Tobago A UN member state A None Trinidad and Tobago contains 1 autonomous region, Tobago.[Note 5]  Tunisia – Republic of Tunisia A UN member state A None  Turkey – Republic of Turkey A UN member state A None  Turkmenistan A UN member state A None  Tuvalu A UN member state A None Tuvalu is a Commonwealth realm.[Note 4]  Uganda – Republic of Uganda A UN member state A None  Ukraine A UN member state A None  United Arab Emirates A UN member state A None The United Arab Emirates is a federation of seven emirates.  United Kingdom – United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland A UN member state A None Member of the EU.[a] The United Kingdom is a Commonwealth realm[Note 4] consisting of four constituent countries: England, Northern Ireland, Scotland, and Wales. The United Kingdom has the following overseas territories:  Akrotiri and Dhekelia  Anguilla  Bermuda  British Indian Ocean Territory  British Virgin Islands  Cayman Islands  Falkland Islands  Gibraltar  Montserrat  Pitcairn Islands  Saint Helena, Ascension and Tristan da Cunha  South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands  Turks and Caicos Islands  British Antarctic Territory The British monarch has direct sovereignty over three self-governing Crown dependencies:  Guernsey, with three dependencies:  Alderney  Herm  Sark  Isle of Man  Jersey  United States – United States of America A UN member state A None The United States is a federation of 50 states and 1 federal district. The United States has sovereignty over the following inhabited possessions and commonwealths:  American Samoa  Guam  Northern Mariana Islands  Puerto Rico  U.S. Virgin Islands It also has sovereignty over several uninhabited territories: Baker Island Howland Island Jarvis Island Johnston Atoll Kingman Reef Midway Atoll Navassa Island Wake Island It also has sovereignty over the following incorporated territories: Palmyra Atoll Three sovereign states have become associated states of the United States under the Compact of Free Association:  Marshall Islands – Republic of the Marshall Islands  Micronesia – Federated States of Micronesia  Palau – Republic of Palau It also disputes sovereignty over the following territories: Bajo Nuevo Bank Serranilla Bank  Uruguay – Oriental Republic of Uruguay A UN member state A None  Uzbekistan – Republic of Uzbekistan A UN member state A None Uzbekistan contains 1 autonomous region, Karakalpakstan.[Note 5]  Vanuatu – Republic of Vanuatu A UN member state A None   Vatican City – Vatican City State A UN observer state under the designation of "Holy See"; member of three UN specialized agencies and the IAEA A None Administered by the Holy See, a sovereign entity with diplomatic ties to 180 states.[45] The Holy See is a member of the IAEA, ITU, UPU, and WIPO and a permanent observer of the UN (in the category of "Non-member State")[42] and multiple other UN System organizations. The Vatican City is governed by officials appointed by the Pope, who is the Bishop of the Diocese of Rome and ex officio sovereign of Vatican City.  Venezuela – Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela A UN member state A None Venezuela is a federation of 23 states, 1 capital district, and federal dependencies.  Vietnam – Socialist Republic of Vietnam A UN member state A None  Yemen – Republic of Yemen A UN member state A None  Zambia – Republic of Zambia A UN member state A None  Zimbabwe – Republic of Zimbabwe A UN member state A None ZZZ↑ UN member states and observer states ↑ A ZZZ ZZZ ZZZ AB B ZZZ↓ Other states ↓ D AAA ZZZ  Abkhazia – Republic of Abkhazia D No membership B Claimed by Georgia Claimed by North Korea Claimed by Serbia Claimed by Somalia Claimed by the People's Republic of China Claimed by the Republic of China Claimed by South Korea Claimed by Azerbaijan Claimed by the Republic of Cyprus Disputed by Israel Claimed by Morocco Claimed by Moldova Claimed by Mali Recognised by Russia, Nauru, Nicaragua, Venezuela,[46] Nagorno-Karabakh, South Ossetia and Transnistria.[47] Claimed in whole by Georgia as the Autonomous Republic of Abkhazia.  Cook Islands D Member of eight UN specialized agencies A None (See political status) A state in free association with New Zealand, the Cook Islands maintains diplomatic relations with 44  states. The Cook Islands is a member of multiple UN agencies with full treaty making capacity.[31] It shares a head of state with New Zealand as well as having shared citizenship.  Kosovo – Republic of Kosovo D Member of two UN specialized agencies B Claimed by Georgia Claimed by North Korea Claimed by Serbia Claimed by Somalia Claimed by the People's Republic of China Claimed by the Republic of China Claimed by South Korea Claimed by Azerbaijan Claimed by the Republic of Cyprus Disputed by Israel Claimed by Morocco Claimed by Moldova Claimed by Mali Pursuant to United Nations Security Council Resolution 1244, Kosovo was placed under the administration of the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo in 1999.[48] Kosovo declared independence in 2008, and it has received diplomatic recognition from 108 UN member states and the Republic of China. Serbia continues to maintain its sovereignty claim over Kosovo. Other UN member states and non UN member states continue to recognise Serbian sovereignty or have taken no position on the question. Kosovo is a member of the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank Group. The Republic of Kosovo has de facto control over most of the territory, with limited control in North Kosovo.  Nagorno-Karabakh – Nagorno-Karabakh Republic[Note 25] D No membership B Claimed by Georgia Claimed by North Korea Claimed by Serbia Claimed by Somalia Claimed by the People's Republic of China Claimed by the Republic of China Claimed by South Korea Claimed by Azerbaijan Claimed by the Republic of Cyprus Disputed by Israel Claimed by Morocco Claimed by Moldova Claimed by Mali A de facto independent state,[49][50][51] recognised only by Abkhazia,[52] South Ossetia[52] and Transnistria.[52][53] Claimed in whole by Azerbaijan.[54]  Niue D Member of five UN specialized agencies A None (See political status) A state in free association with New Zealand, Niue maintains diplomatic relations with 19  states. Niue is a member of multiple UN agencies with full treaty making capacity.[31] It shares a head of state with New Zealand as well as having shared citizenship.  Northern Cyprus – Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus D No membership Claimed by Cyprus Recognised only by Turkey. Under the name "Turkish Cypriot State", it is an observer state of the Organisation of Islamic Cooperation and the Economic Cooperation Organization. Northern Cyprus is claimed in whole by the Republic of Cyprus.[55]  Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic D No membership B Claimed by Georgia Claimed by North Korea Claimed by Serbia Claimed by Somalia Claimed by the People's Republic of China Claimed by the Republic of China Claimed by South Korea Claimed by Azerbaijan Claimed by the Republic of Cyprus Disputed by Israel Claimed by Morocco Claimed by Moldova Claimed by Mali Recognised at some stage by 84 UN member states, 37 of which have since withdrawn or frozen their recognition. It is a founding member of the African Union and the Asian-African Strategic Partnership formed at the 2005 Asian-African Conference. The territories under its control, the so-called Free Zone, are claimed in whole by Morocco as part of its Southern Provinces. In turn, the Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic claims the part of Western Sahara to the west of the Moroccan Wall controlled by Morocco. Its government resides in exile in Tindouf, Algeria.  Somaliland – Republic of Somaliland D No membership B Claimed by Georgia Claimed by North Korea Claimed by Serbia Claimed by Somalia Claimed by the People's Republic of China Claimed by the Republic of China Claimed by South Korea Claimed by Azerbaijan Claimed by the Republic of Cyprus Disputed by Israel Claimed by Morocco Claimed by Moldova Claimed by Mali A de facto independent state,[49][56][57][58][59] not diplomatically recognised by any other state, claimed in whole by the Federal Republic of Somalia.[60]  South Ossetia – Republic of South Ossetia D No membership B Claimed by Georgia Claimed by North Korea Claimed by Serbia Claimed by Somalia Claimed by the People's Republic of China Claimed by the Republic of China Claimed by South Korea Claimed by Azerbaijan Claimed by the Republic of Cyprus Disputed by Israel Claimed by Morocco Claimed by Moldova Claimed by Mali A de facto independent state,[61] recognised by Russia, Nicaragua, Nauru, Venezuela,[46] Abkhazia, Nagorno-Karabakh, and Transnistria.[47] Claimed in whole by Georgia as the Provisional Administrative Entity of South Ossetia.[62]  Taiwan – Republic of China[Note 10] DFormer UN member (as Republic of China, 1945-1971) Observer in one UN specialized agency under the name "Chinese Taipei" B Claimed by Georgia Claimed by North Korea Claimed by Serbia Claimed by Somalia Claimed by the People's Republic of China Claimed by the Republic of China Claimed by South Korea Claimed by Azerbaijan Claimed by the Republic of Cyprus Disputed by Israel Claimed by Morocco Claimed by Moldova Claimed by Mali A state competing for recognition with the People's Republic of China as the government of China since 1949. The Republic of China controls the island of Taiwan and associated islands, Quemoy, Matsu, the Pratas and parts of the Spratly Islands,[Note 26] and has not renounced claims over its annexed territories on the mainland.[63] The Republic of China is recognised by 21 UN member states and the Holy See as of 2013. The territory of the Republic of China is claimed in whole by the People's Republic of China.[Note 12] The Republic of China participates in international organizations under a variety of pseudonyms, most commonly "Chinese Taipei" and in the WTO it has full membership. The Republic of China was a founding member of the UN and enjoyed membership from 1945 to 1971, with veto power in the security council. See China and the United Nations.  Transnistria – Pridnestrovian Moldavian Republic D No membership B Claimed by Georgia Claimed by North Korea Claimed by Serbia Claimed by Somalia Claimed by the People's Republic of China Claimed by the Republic of China Claimed by South Korea Claimed by Azerbaijan Claimed by the Republic of Cyprus Disputed by Israel Claimed by Morocco Claimed by Moldova Claimed by Mali A de facto independent state,[49] recognised only by Abkhazia, Nagorno-Karabakh, and South Ossetia.[47] Claimed in whole by Moldova as the Transnistria autonomous territorial unit.[64] ZZZ↑ Other states ↑ D ZZZ ZZZ ZZZZ ZZZZ ZZZZ Legend "Membership within the UN system" column   UN Member states   UN Observer states   Member of a UN Specialized Agency   Observer in a UN Specialized Agency   No membership in the UN system Legend "Sovereignty dispute" column   Undisputed sovereignty   Sovereignty disputed Criteria for inclusion The dominant customary international law standard of statehood is the declarative theory of statehood, which was codified by the Montevideo Convention of 1933. The Convention defines the state as a person of international law if it "possess[es] the following qualifications: (a) a permanent population; (b) a defined territory; (c) government; and (d) a capacity to enter into relations with the other states" so long as it was not "obtained by force whether this consists in the employment of arms, in threatening diplomatic representations, or in any other effective coercive measure".[65] Debate exists on the degree to which recognition should be included as a criterion of statehood. The declarative theory of statehood argues that statehood is purely objective and recognition of a state by other states is irrelevant. On the other end of the spectrum, the constitutive theory of statehood defines a state as a person under international law only if it is recognised as sovereign by other states. For the purposes of this list, included are all states that either: (a) consider themselves sovereign (through a declaration of independence or some other means) and are often regarded as satisfying the declarative theory of statehood, or (b) are recognised as a sovereign state by at least one UN member state Note that in some cases, there is a divergence of opinion over the interpretation of the first point, and whether an entity satisfies it is disputed. On the basis of the above criteria, this list includes the following 206 entities:[66][Note 27] 203 states recognised by at least one UN member state Two states that satisfy the declarative theory of statehood and are recognised only by non-UN member states: Nagorno-Karabakh Republic, Transnistria One state that satisfies the declarative theory of statehood and is not recognised by any other state: Somaliland See also ISO 3166-1 Adjectivals and demonyms for countries and nations Sovereign state List of sovereign states and dependent territories by continent List of shortest lived sovereign states List of sovereign states by date of formation Lists of sovereign states by year List of countries and capitals in native languages List of national capitals in alphabetical order Gallery of country coats of arms Gallery of sovereign state flags List of country-name etymologies List of international rankings List of micronations List of states with limited recognition List of dependent territories List of territorial disputes Table of administrative divisions by country Template:Clickable world map Terra nullius List of rebel groups that control territory Notes ^ This column indicates whether or not a state is a member of the United Nations.[1] It also indicates which non-member states participate in the United Nations System through membership in the International Atomic Energy Agency or one of the specialized agencies of the United Nations. All United Nations members belong to at least one specialized agency and are parties to the statute of the International Court of Justice. ^ This column indicates whether or not a state is the subject of a major sovereignty dispute. Only states whose entire sovereignty is disputed by another state are listed. ^ Information is included on: The extent to which a state's sovereignty is recognised internationally. More information can be found at List of states with limited recognition, Membership in the European Union,[a] where applicable, Any overseas dependencies, if applicable, which are generally not part of the territory of the sovereign state, federal structure of the state, where applicable. More information can be found at Federated state, Any autonomous areas inside the territory of the sovereign state, Any situations where one person is the Head of State of more than one state, Any governments in exile recognised by at least one state. ^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p Commonwealth realms are members of the Commonwealth of Nations in which the head of state is Queen Elizabeth II. The realms are sovereign states; see Relationship of the realms. ^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r s t u v w For more information on divisions with a high degree of autonomy, see the List of autonomous areas by country. ^ The Argentine Constitution (Art. 35) recognises the following denominations for Argentina: "United Provinces of the Río de la Plata", "Argentine Republic" and "Argentine Confederation"; furthermore, it establishes the usage of "Argentine Nation" for purposes of legislation. ^ Formerly referred to as Dahomey, its official name until 1975. ^ Also known as Burkina; formerly referred to as Upper Volta, its official name until 1984. ^ The legal name for Canada is the sole word; an officially sanctioned, though disused, name is Dominion of Canada (which includes its legal title); see: Name of Canada, Dominion. ^ a b The People's Republic of China (PRC) is commonly referred to as "China", while the Republic of China (ROC) is commonly referred to as "Taiwan". The ROC is also occasionally known diplomatically as Chinese Taipei, along with other names. ^ See also Dates of establishment of diplomatic relations with the People's Republic of China and Foreign relations of the People's Republic of China. ^ a b In 1949, the Republic of China government led by the Kuomintang (KMT) lost the Chinese Civil War to the Communist Party of China (CPC) and set up a provisional capital in Taipei. The CPC established the PRC. As such, the political status of the ROC and the legal status of Taiwan (alongside the territories under ROC jurisdiction) are in dispute. In 1971, the United Nations gave the China seat to the PRC and the ROC withdrew from the UN. Most states recognise the PRC to be the sole legitimate representative of all China, and the UN classifies Taiwan as "Taiwan, Province of China". The ROC has de facto relations with most sovereign states. A significant political movement within Taiwan advocates Taiwan independence. ^ a b c More information on more or less federal structures can be found at a List of federations. ^ Also known as Congo-Kinshasa. Formerly referred to as Zaire, its official name from 1971 to 1997. ^ Also known as Congo-Brazzaville. ^ A simpler official short-form name has been encouraged by the Czech government: the English variant Czechia remains uncommon, but variants in Czech (Česko) and some other languages are more popular. See Name of the Czech Republic ^ The government of East Timor uses "Timor-Leste" as the English translation. ^ Åland was demilitarised by the Treaty of Paris in 1856, which was later affirmed by the League of Nations in 1921, and in a somewhat different context reaffirmed in the treaty on Finland's admission to the European Union in 1995. ^ Also known as Guinea-Conakry. ^ While sometimes referred to as the "Republic of Iceland" ([1] [2]) and sometimes its counterpart Lýðveldið Ísland in Icelandic, the official name of the country is simply Iceland. [3][4] One example of the former is the name of the Constitution of Iceland, which in Icelandic is Stjórnarskrá lýðveldisins Íslands and literally means "the Constitution of the republic of Iceland", but note that "republic" is not capitalized. The official title of the President of Iceland (Forseti Íslands) does also not include the word republic as in some other republics. See Names for Iceland. ^ "Ireland" is the official name in English. "Republic of Ireland" (the official description in English) and "Éire" (the official name in Irish) have sometimes been used unofficially to distinguish the state from the larger island of Ireland; this is officially deprecated.[16] See names of the Irish state. ^ a b Both North Korea and South Korea claim to be the sole legitimate government of Korea. See also Foreign relations of North Korea and Foreign relations of South Korea. ^ The government changed the state's official name in English from "Union of Myanmar" to "Republic of the Union of Myanmar" in October 2010. ^ Sovereignty over Kashmir is disputed between India and Pakistan; smaller parts are disputed by the People's Republic of China and the Republic of China. Kashmir is divided between India, Pakistan and the PRC. See the List of territorial disputes. ^ The Constitution of the Nagorno-Karabakh Republic (Art. 1.2) recognizes "Artsakh Republic" as an alternative denomination. ^ The sovereignty over the Spratly Islands is disputed by China, Taiwan, Vietnam, and in part by Brunei, Malaysia, and the Philippines. Except for Brunei, each of these countries occupies part of the islands (see List of territorial disputes). ^ The Sovereign Military Order of Malta is not included, as despite being a sovereign entity it lacks territory and does not claim statehood. Entities considered to be micronations are not included. It is often up to debate whether a micronation truly controls its claimed territory. Also omitted from this list are all uncontacted peoples, either who live in societies that cannot be defined as states or whose statuses as such are not definitively known. ^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r s t u v w x y z aa ab ac The member states of the European Union have transferred part of their sovereignty in the form of legislative, executive, and judicial powers to the institutions of the EU, which is an example of supranational union. The EU has 28 member states.[7] References ^ a b Press Release ORG/1469 (3 July 2006). "United Nations Member States". United Nations. Retrieved 28 February 2011.  ^ "Andorra country profile". BBC News. Retrieved 8 November 2011.  ^ Government of Antigua and Barbuda. "Chapter 44: The Barbuda Local Government Act" (PDF). Laws of Antigua and Barbuda. Retrieved 2010-11-10.  ^ "Pakistan Worldview, Report 21, Visit to Azerbaijan" (PDF). Senate of Pakistan Foreign Relations Committee. 2008. Archived from the original (PDF) on 19 February 2009.  ^ Nilufer Bakhtiyar: "For Azerbaijan Pakistan does not recognise Armenia as a country" 13 September 2006 [14:03] – Today.Az ^ "Pakistan the only country not recognizing Armenia – envoy". News.Az. February 5, 2014. Retrieved February 17, 2014. We are the only country not recognizing Armenia as a state.  ^ Europa, retrieved 28 February 2011 ^ Stjepanović, Dejan (2015). "Dual Substate Citizenship as Institutional Innovation: The Case of Bosnia’s Brčko District". Nationalism and Ethnic Politics 21 (4): 382–383. doi:10.1080/13537113.2015.1095043. eISSN 1557-2986. ISSN 1353-7113. OCLC 5927465455. (subscription required (help)).  ^ Constitution of Comoros, Art. 1. ^ Andreas S. Kakouris (July 9, 2010). "Cyprus is not at peace with Turkey". CNN. Retrieved May 17, 2014. Turkey stands alone in violation of the will of the international community. It is the only country to recognize the "TRNC" and is the only country that does not recognize the Republic of Cyprus and its government.  ^ See Republic of Turkey Ministry for European Union Affairs Retrieved June 12, 2012. ^ "Rotuma Act". Laws of Fiji (1978 ed.). Suva, Fiji: Government of Fiji. 1927. Retrieved 2010-07-10.  Archived June 21, 2010, at the Wayback Machine. ^ Government of Fiji, Office of the Prime Minister (1978). "Chapter 122: Rotuma Act". Laws of Fiji. University of the South Pacific. Retrieved 2010-11-10.  ^ Constitution of Greece, Art. 105. ^ Source: Iraqi constitution ^ Daly, Mary E. (January 2007). "The Irish Free State/Éire/Republic of Ireland/Ireland: "A Country by Any Other Name"?". Journal of British Studies (Cambridge University Press on behalf of The North American Conference on British Studies) 46 (1). doi:10.1086/508399. (subscription required (help)).  ^ Knesset website, Basic Law: Jerusalem, Capital of Israel ^ "Disputes: International". CIA World Factbook. Retrieved 8 November 2011.  ^ Gold, Dore; Institute for Contemporary Affairs (26 August 2005). "Legal Acrobatics: The Palestinian Claim that Gaza is Still "Occupied" Even After Israel Withdraws". Jerusalem Issue Brief, Vol. 5, No. 3. Jerusalem Center for Public Affairs. Retrieved 2010-07-16.  ^ Bell, Abraham (28 January 2008). "International Law and Gaza: The Assault on Israel's Right to Self-Defense". Jerusalem Issue Brief, Vol. 7, No. 29. Jerusalem Center for Public Affairs. Retrieved 2010-07-16.  ^ "Address by Foreign Minister Livni to the 8th Herzliya Conference" (Press release). Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Israel. 22 January 2008. Retrieved 2010-07-16.  ^ Salih, Zak M. (17 November 2005). "Panelists Disagree Over Gaza's Occupation Status". University of Virginia School of Law. Retrieved 2010-07-16.  ^ "Israel: 'Disengagement' Will Not End Gaza Occupation". Human Rights Watch. 29 October 2004. Retrieved 2010-07-16.  ^ "Treaty on Basic Relations between Japan and the Republic of Korea". Retrieved 2008-10-27.  ^ Keun Min. "Greetings". Jeju Special Self-Governing Province. Retrieved 2010-11-10.  ^ "East Libya declares self-government". Al Jazeera. November 3, 2013. Retrieved November 5, 2013.  ^ "Myanmar gets new flag, official name, anthem". Reuters. 21 October 2010. Retrieved 22 October 2010.  ^ Federal Foreign Office of Germany (November 2009). "Beziehungen zu Deutschland". Government of Germany. Retrieved 2010-07-16.  For more information, see Foreign relations of the Cook Islands. ^ China Internet Information Centre (13 December 2007). "Full text of joint communique on the establishment of diplomatic relations between China and Niue". Xinhua News Agency. Retrieved 2010-07-16.  ^ Republic of Nauru Permanent Mission to the United Nations. "Foreign Affairs". United Nations. Retrieved 2010-07-16.  ^ a b c http://untreaty.un.org/cod/repertory/art102/english/rep_supp8_vol6-art102_e_advance.pdf ^ Constitution of Pakistan, Art. 1. ^ Aslam, Tasnim (11 December 2006). "'Pakistan Does Not Claim Kashmir As An Integral Part...'". Outlook India (The Outlook Group).  ^ Williams, Kristen P. (2001). Despite nationalist conflicts: theory and practice of maintaining world peace. Greenwood Publishing Group. pp. 154–155. ISBN 978-0-275-96934-9.  ^ Pruthi, R.K. (2001). An Encyclopaedic Survey Of Global Terrorism In 21St Century. Anmol Publications Pvt. Ltd. pp. 120–121. ISBN 978-81-261-1091-9.  ^ http://home.ajk.gov.pk/index.php?option=com_content&view=article&id=72&catid=14 ^ a b http://gbtribune.files.wordpress.com/2012/09/self-governance-order-2009.pdf ^ Political Handbook of the World 2014. Retrieved 5 October 2014.  ^ http://www.ajkassembly.gok.pk/AJK_Interim_Constitution_Act_1974.pdf ^ Palestine Liberation Organization. "Road For Palestinian Statehood: Recognition and Admission". Negotiations Affairs Department. Retrieved 2011-07-28.  ^ See the following on statehood criteria: Mendes, Errol (30 March 2010). "Statehood and Palestine for the purposes of Article 12 (3) of the ICC Statute" (PDF). 30 March 2010: 28, 33. Retrieved 2011-04-17:  "...the Palestinian State also meets the traditional criteria under the Montevideo Convention..."; "...the fact that a majority of states have recognised Palestine as a State should easily fulfill the requisite state practice". McKinney, Kathryn M. (1994). "The Legal Effects of the Israeli-PLO Declaration ofPrinciples: Steps Toward Statehood for Palestine". Seattle University Law Review (Seattle University) 18 (93): 97. Retrieved 2011-04-17:  "It is possible, however, to argue for Palestinian statehood based on the constitutive theory". McDonald, Avril (Spring 2009). "Operation Cast Lead: Drawing the Battle Lines of the Legal Dispute". Human Rights Brief (Washington College of Law, Center for Human Rights and Humanitarian Law) 25. Retrieved 2011-04-17:  "Whether one applies the criteria of statehood set out in the Montevideo Convention or the more widely accepted constitutive theory of statehood, Palestine might be considered a state." ^ a b "Non-member States and Entities". United Nations. 29 February 2008. Retrieved 30 August 2010.  ^ United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization. "Arab States: Palestine". United Nations. Retrieved 3 December 2011.  ^ Weller, Marc; Nobbs, Katherine (2010). Asymmetric Autonomy and the Settlement of Ethnic Conflicts. Philadelphia, United States: University of Pennsylvania Press. ISBN 978-0-8122-4230-0.  ^ "Bilateral relations of the Holy See". Holy See website. Retrieved 2012-06-05.  ^ a b "Chavez Backs Abkhazia, South Ossetia". St. Petersburg Times. Associated Press. 27 July 2010. Retrieved 5 June 2011.  ^ a b c Абхазия, Южная Осетия и Приднестровье признали независимость друг друга и призвали всех к этому же (in Russian). newsru.com. 2006-11-17. Retrieved 2011-06-05.  ^ "United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo". UN. Retrieved 8 January 2015.  ^ a b c Ker-Lindsay, James (2012). The Foreign Policy of Counter Secession: Preventing the Recognition of Contested States. Oxford University Press. p. 53. ...there are three other territories that have unilaterally declared independence and are generally regarded as having met the Montevideo criteria for statehood but have not been recognized by any states: Transnistria, Nagorny Karabakh, and Somaliland.  ^ Krüger, Heiko (2010). The Nagorno-Karabakh Conflict: A Legal Analysis. Springer. p. 55. ISBN 978-3-642-11787-9.  ^ Nikoghosyan, Hovhannes (August 2010). "Kosovo ruling implications for Armenia and Azerbaijan". HULIQ.com (Hareyan Publishing, LLC). Retrieved 2011-04-17.  ^ a b c Вице-спикер парламента Абхазии: Выборы в НКР соответствуют всем международным стандартам: "Абхазия, Южная Осетия, НКР и Приднестровье уже давно признали независимость друг друга и очень тесно сотрудничают между собой", – сказал вице-спикер парламента Абхазии. ... "...Абхазия признала независимость Нагорно-Карабахской Республики..." – сказал он." ^ "In detail: The foreign policy of Pridnestrovie". Pridnestrovie. 2010-05-26. Retrieved 2010-06-29.  ^ See Regions and territories: Nagorno-Karabakh (17 January 2006). BBC News. Retrieved January 17, 2006. ^ See The World Factbook|Cyprus (10 January 2006). Central Intelligence Agency. Retrieved January 17, 2006. ^ "Self-Determination, Sovereignty, and the Failure of States: Somaliland and the Case for Justified Secession" (PDF). Minnesota Journal of International Law 19:2: 380–381. 2010. Considering each of these factors, Somaliland has a colorable argument that it meets the theoretical requirements of statehood. ... On these bases, Somaliland appears to have a strong claim to statehood.  ^ International Crisis Group (23 May 2006). "Somaliland: Time for African Union leadership" (PDF). Africa Report (110): 10–13. Retrieved 2011-04-19  ^ Mesfin, Berouk (September 2009). "The political development of Somaliland and its conflict with Puntland" (PDF). ISS Paper (Institute for Security Studies) (200): 8. Retrieved 2011-04-19  ^ Arieff, Alexis. "De Facto Statehood? The Strange Case of Somaliland" (PDF). Yale Journal of International Affairs (Spring/Summer 2008). Retrieved 2011-04-17  ^ See Regions and territories: Somaliland (30 December 2005). BBC News. Retrieved January 17, 2006. ^ Jansen, Dinah (2009). "The Conflict between Self-Determination and Territorial Integrity: the South Ossetian Paradigm" (PDF). Geopolitics vs. Global Governance: Reinterpreting International Security (Centre for Foreign Policy Studies, University of Dalhousie): 222–242. ISBN 978-1-896440-61-3  ^ "Russia condemned for recognizing rebel regions". CNN.com (Cable News Network). 2008-08-26. Retrieved 2008-08-26.  ^ "Ma refers to China as ROC territory in magazine interview". Taipei Times. 2008-10-08.  ^ 'See Regions and territories: Trans-Dniester (13 December 2005). BBC News. Retrieved January 17, 2006. ^ Hersch Lauterpacht (2012). Recognition in International Law. Cambridge University Press. p. 419.  ^ The following bullets are grouped according to the availability of sources for the two criteria ((a) and/or (b)). This arrangement is not intended to reflect the relative importance of the two theories. Additional details are discussed in the state's individual entries. Bibliography Bissio, Roberto Remo, ed. (1995). The World: A Third World Guide: 1995/96. Montevideo: Instituto del Tercer Mundo. ISBN 978-0-85598-291-1. OCLC 476299738.  "Countries or areas, codes and abbreviations". Statistics Division, United Nations. 1 April 2010.  Davis, Tim (19 February 2009). "World Countries and States List". Timdavis.com.au.  "Geographic Names" (PDF). Department of Public Information, Cartographic Section, United Nations. 7 September 2000.  "ISO 3166-1 Country names and code elements". International Organization for Standardization. 2010.  "List of countries, territories and currencies". Publications Office of the European Union. 4 May 2010.  "The World Factbook". United States: Central Intelligence Agency. 2010.  World of Information (Firm), and International Chamber of Commerce (2003). Middle East Review 2003/04: The Economic and Business Report (27th ed.). London: Kogan Page. p. 161. ISBN 978-0-7494-4066-4. OCLC 51992589.  Geography portal Lists portal v t e Lists of sovereign states and dependent territories by continent Continents Africa Antarctica Asia Europe North America Oceania South America Supercontinents Americas Eurasia v t e Lists of sovereign states by year   AD (CE) Current list of sovereign states Centuries 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th 6th 7th 8th 9th 10th 11th 19th Years 12th–18th century 1143 1400 1494 1496 1500 1528 1648 1660 1661 1768 1769 1776 19th century 1820 1821 1822 1823 1824 1825 1826 1827 1828 1829 1830 1831 1832 1833 1834 1835 1836 1837 1838 1839 1840 1841 1842 1843 1844 1845 1846 1847 1848 1849 1850 1851 1852 1853 1854 1855 1856 1857 1858 1859 1860 1861 1862 1863 1864 1865 1866 1867 1868 1869 1870 1871 1872 1873 1874 1875 1876 1877 1878 1879 1880 1881 1882 1883 1884 1885 1886 1887 1888 1889 1890 1891 1892 1893 1894 1895 1896 1897 1898 1899 20th century 1901 1902 1903 1904 1905 1906 1907 1908 1909 1910 1911 1912 1913 1914 1915 1916 1917 1918 1919 1920 1921 1922 1923 1924 1925 1926 1927 1928 1929 1930 1931 1932 1933 1934 1935 1936 1937 1938 1939 1940 1941 1942 1943 1944 1945 1946 1947 1948 1949 1970 1971 1980 1981 1989 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 21st century 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 Decades 1950s 1960s 1970s 1980s 1990s 2000s 2010s Ages Classical Late Antiquity Middle   BC (BCE) 100 BC Centuries 35th BC 21st BC 20th BC 19th BC 18th BC 17th BC 16th BC 15th BC 14th BC 13th BC 12th BC 11th BC 10th BC 9th BC 8th BC 7th BC 6th BC 5th BC 4th BC 3rd BC 2nd BC 1st BC Ages Copper Bronze Iron Classical v t e States with limited recognition Details concerning international recognition and foreign relations provided by the articles linked in parenthesis UN member states Partially unrecognised Armenia relations China relations Cyprus relations Israel recognition relations North Korea relations South Korea relations Non-UN member states Recognised by at least one UN member Abkhazia recognition relations Kosovo recognition relations Northern Cyprus relations Palestine recognition relations Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic (Western Sahara) recognition relations South Ossetia recognition relations Taiwan relations Recognised only by non-UN members Nagorno-Karabakh recognition relations Transnistria recognition relations Unrecognised Somaliland relations Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=List_of_sovereign_states&oldid=718509563" Categories: Lists of countries Hidden categories: Pages containing links to subscription-only content CS1 uses Russian-language script (ru) CS1 Russian-language sources (ru) Articles with inconsistent citation formats Wikipedia articles needing factual verification from March 2011 Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Article Talk Variants Views Read View source View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Featured content Current events Random article Donate to Wikipedia Wikipedia store Interaction Help About Wikipedia Community portal Recent changes Contact page Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Cite this page Print/export Create a book Download as PDF Printable version Languages Afrikaans Alemannisch አማርኛ Ænglisc Аҧсшәа العربية Aragonés ܐܪܡܝܐ Armãneashti Arpetan অসমীয়া Asturianu Avañe'ẽ Azərbaycanca বাংলা Bahasa Banjar Bân-lâm-gú Basa Banyumasan Башҡортса Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца)‎ Bikol Central Български Boarisch བོད་ཡིག Bosanski Brezhoneg Буряад Català Cebuano Čeština Chavacano de Zamboanga Cymraeg Dansk Deitsch Deutsch Diné bizaad Dolnoserbski ཇོང་ཁ Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Føroyskt Français Frysk Fulfulde Furlan Gaeilge Gaelg Gagauz Gàidhlig Galego Хальмг 한국어 Hausa Hawaiʻi Հայերեն हिन्दी Hornjoserbsce Hrvatski Ido Igbo Ilokano বিষ্ণুপ্রিয়া মণিপুরী Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Interlingue Ирон Íslenska Italiano עברית Basa Jawa Kalaallisut ಕನ್ನಡ Kapampangan ქართული Қазақша Kernowek Kiswahili Kongo Kreyòl ayisyen Kurdî Кыргызча Ladino Latgaļu Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvių Limburgs Lingála La .lojban. Magyar Македонски Malagasy മലയാളം Malti मराठी მარგალური مصرى Bahasa Melayu Baso Minangkabau Mirandés Монгол မြန်မာဘာသာ Nedersaksies नेपाली 日本語 Napulitano Nordfriisk Norfuk / Pitkern Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Nouormand Occitan ଓଡ଼ିଆ Oʻzbekcha/ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ Pangasinan پنجابی پښتو ភាសាខ្មែរ Tok Pisin Plattdüütsch Polski Português Qaraqalpaqsha Qırımtatarca Română Romani Rumantsch Runa Simi Русиньскый Русский Саха тыла Sámegiella Gagana Samoa संस्कृतम् Sardu Scots Seeltersk Sicilianu සිංහල Simple English سنڌي SiSwati Slovenčina Slovenščina Soomaaliga کوردیی ناوەندی Sranantongo Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Basa Sunda Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் Taqbaylit Татарча/tatarça తెలుగు Tetun ไทย Тоҷикӣ ᏣᎳᎩ Türkçe Türkmençe Удмурт ᨅᨔ ᨕᨘᨁᨗ Українська اردو ئۇيغۇرچە / Uyghurche Vèneto Vepsän kel’ Tiếng Việt Võro Winaray Wolof 吴语 ייִדיש Yorùbá 粵語 Zazaki Žemaitėška 中文 Адыгабзэ Edit links This page was last modified on 3 May 2016, at 23:01. Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view