Talk:Flag Institute - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Talk:Flag Institute From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to: navigation, search This page was nominated for deletion on 15 April 2013 (UTC). The result of the discussion was keep.           This article is of interest to the following WikiProjects: WikiProject Organizations   OrganizationsWikipedia:WikiProject OrganizationsTemplate:WikiProject Organizationsorganization articles v t e This article is within the scope of the WikiProject Organizations. If you would like to participate please visit the project page, where you can join the project and see a list of open tasks.  ???  This article has not yet received a rating on the project's quality scale.  ???  This article has not yet received a rating on the project's importance scale.   WikiProject Heraldry and vexillology (Rated Start-class) Heraldry and vexillologyWikipedia:WikiProject Heraldry and vexillologyTemplate:WikiProject Heraldry and vexillologyheraldry and vexillology articles Heraldry portal v t e Flag Institute is within the scope of the Heraldry and vexillology WikiProject, a collaborative effort to improve Wikipedia's coverage of heraldry and vexillology. If you would like to participate, you can visit the project page, where you can join the project and see a list of open tasks.  Start  This article has been rated as Start-Class on the project's quality scale.   WikiProject Yorkshire (Rated Start-class, Low-importance) YorkshireWikipedia:WikiProject YorkshireTemplate:WikiProject YorkshireYorkshire articles Yorkshire portal v t e Flag Institute is within the scope of WikiProject Yorkshire, an attempt to build a comprehensive and detailed guide to Yorkshire on Wikipedia. If you would like to participate, you can visit the project page, where you can join the project, see a list of open tasks, and join in discussions on the project's talk page.  Start  This article has been rated as Start-Class on the project's quality scale.  Low  This article has been rated as Low-importance on the project's importance scale.   Criteria for Inclusion in the UK Flag Registry[edit] Why should only the single criterion for county flags (listed third out of eight in the source) be deemed worthy of note in the article? I'm not sure that the size of the article warrants inclusion of all eight. So, if all eight are not listed, I think it's fair not to give any undue weight by including only one? What do other editors think? Martinevans123 (talk) 19:52, 22 February 2012 (UTC) Because it excludes the Met counties, that is the only purpose of that statement and is such is controversial. If the Institute was neutral it would include flags for all local government areas not just the ones that it approves of.--Kitchen Knife (talk) 19:58, 22 February 2012 (UTC) I'm sorry, but why exactly is a link to the Westmorland Association of particular relevance to this article? Thanks. Martinevans123 (talk) 20:40, 22 February 2012 (UTC) It is evidence, if you read the page, that they are quiet happy to take nominations from any ragtag bunch for counties pre 1972. Demonstrating once again there agenda.--Kitchen Knife (talk) 21:23, 22 February 2012 (UTC) You are presenting evidence for a particular point of view. But that's contary to WP:POV. It's you that seems to have an agenda here? Why should pre-1972 counties represent a "ragbag"? Martinevans123 (talk) 22:11, 22 February 2012 (UTC) See above. The Flag Institute state that "In the case of county flags, the flag must normally apply to a historical county rather than a modern administrative area." You seem to be interpreting metropolitan counties as "modern administrative areas" rather than "historical counties". Why? The met counties as administrative areas were abolished in 1986, so are just as much "historical" as many other counties. Without providing any evidence that the Flag Institute has a policy of excluding met counties, the words you are adding are clearly synthesis. Ghmyrtle (talk) 12:20, 24 February 2012 (UTC) To reiterate what I posted on my talk page: The inclusion criteria do not exclude "the Met counties" or any other type of geographical area — witness the registered flags of East Anglia and Wessex for example. There is currently no Merseyside flag, but if you want to campaign for one then you are quite free to do so. Due to the lack of a history of common identity there is little chance of one being accepted given that there are already historic flags for Lancashire and Cheshire. Owain (talk) 18:03, 24 February 2012 (UTC) Most of the arguments presented here seem to be perfectly reasonable. But I am still intrigued as to why specific note needs to be made of the rules regard flags for counties. Does this indicate that the work of the Institute is primarily concerned with county flags? Is this the aspect of their work most significant to the public? Or is there some other reason? Perhaps it might be easier, and more informative, to list all the criteria? Martinevans123 (talk) 19:34, 24 February 2012 (UTC) That reference was added here by User:Kitchen Knife (now blocked, again) - presumably because he felt it supported his claim that the Institute was in some way biased against the met counties. I agree it should not be given any more weight in the article than any other of the Institute's criteria - and I suppose that in the interests of "building the encyclopedia", it makes sense to list them all. Ghmyrtle (talk) 19:45, 24 February 2012 (UTC) The criteria for inclusion was a word-for-word copy-paste from the Institute website, so I've removed it anyway. Listing the full criteria for inclusion is probably WP:UNDUE, being cited as it is to WP:PRIMARY sources. We should be sticking to notable facts that have been published independently. Sionk (talk) 14:01, 4 January 2013 (UTC) COI[edit] I've added the COI template to the article because the Institute executive, Charles Ashburner, is heavily involved in editing this page. In addition, suspected sockpuppet Wooster49 has also been making major edits. This article shouldn't be a blatant advert for the Institute, it should instead concentrate on summarising the notable facts that have been independently reported. Sionk (talk) 14:01, 4 January 2013 (UTC) Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Talk:Flag_Institute&oldid=705992125" Categories: Unassessed organization articles Unknown-importance organization articles WikiProject Organizations articles Start-Class heraldry and vexillology articles WikiProject Heraldry and vexillology articles Start-Class Yorkshire articles Low-importance Yorkshire articles WikiProject Yorkshire articles Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Article Talk Variants Views Read Edit New section View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Featured content Current events Random article Donate to Wikipedia Wikipedia store Interaction Help About Wikipedia Community portal Recent changes Contact page Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Print/export Create a book Download as PDF Printable version Languages This page was last modified on 20 February 2016, at 20:06. Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view