Edge (geometry) - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Edge (geometry) From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to: navigation, search Three edges AB, BC, and CA, each between two vertices of a triangle. A polygon is bounded by edges; this square has 4 edges. Every edge is shared by two faces in a polyhedron, like this cube. Every edge is shared by three or more faces in a 4-polytope, as seen in this projection of a tesseract. In geometry, an edge is a particular type of line segment joining two vertices in a polygon, polyhedron, or higher-dimensional polytope.[1] In a polygon, an edge is a line segment on the boundary,[2] and is often called a side. In a polyhedron or more generally a polytope, an edge is a line segment where two faces meet.[3] A segment joining two vertices while passing through the interior or exterior is not an edge but instead is called a diagonal. Contents 1 Relation to edges in graphs 2 Number of edges in a polyhedron 3 Incidences with other faces 4 Alternative terminology 5 See also 6 References 7 External links Relation to edges in graphs[edit] In graph theory, an edge is an abstract object connecting two graph vertices, unlike polygon and polyhedron edges which have a concrete geometric representation as a line segment. However, any polyhedron can be represented by its skeleton or edge-skeleton, a graph whose vertices are the geometric vertices of the polyhedron and whose edges correspond to the geometric edges.[4] Conversely, the graphs that are skeletons of three-dimensional polyhedra can be characterized by Steinitz's theorem as being exactly the 3-vertex-connected planar graphs.[5] Number of edges in a polyhedron[edit] Any convex polyhedron's surface has Euler characteristic where V is the number of vertices, E is the number of edges, and F is the number of faces. This equation is known as Euler's polyhedron formula. Thus the number of edges is 2 less than the sum of the numbers of vertices and faces. For example, a cube has 8 vertices and 6 faces, and hence 12 edges. Incidences with other faces[edit] In a polygon, two edges meet at each vertex; more generally, by Balinski's theorem, at least d edges meet at every vertex of a d-dimensional convex polytope.[6] Similarly, in a polyhedron, exactly two two-dimensional faces meet at every edge,[7] while in higher dimensional polytopes three or more two-dimensional faces meet at every edge. Alternative terminology[edit] In the theory of high-dimensional convex polytopes, a facet or side of a d-dimensional polytope is one of its (d − 1)-dimensional features, a ridge is a (d − 2)-dimensional feature, and a peak is a (d − 3)-dimensional feature. Thus, the edges of a polygon are its facets, the edges of a 3-dimensional convex polyhedron are its ridges, and the edges of a 4-dimensional polytope are its peaks.[8] See also[edit] Extended side References[edit] ^ Ziegler, Günter M. (1995), Lectures on Polytopes, Graduate Texts in Mathematics 152, Springer, Definition 2.1, p. 51 . ^ Weisstein, Eric W. "Polygon Edge." From MathWorld--A Wolfram Web Resource. http://mathworld.wolfram.com/PolygonEdge.html ^ Weisstein, Eric W. "Polytope Edge." From MathWorld--A Wolfram Web Resource. http://mathworld.wolfram.com/PolytopeEdge.html ^ Senechal, Marjorie (2013), Shaping Space: Exploring Polyhedra in Nature, Art, and the Geometrical Imagination, Springer, p. 81, ISBN 9780387927145 . ^ Pisanski, Tomaž; Randić, Milan (2000), "Bridges between geometry and graph theory", in Gorini, Catherine A., Geometry at work, MAA Notes 53, Washington, DC: Math. Assoc. America, pp. 174–194, MR 1782654 . See in particular Theorem 3, p. 176. ^ Balinski, M. L. (1961), "On the graph structure of convex polyhedra in n-space", Pacific Journal of Mathematics 11 (2): 431–434, doi:10.2140/pjm.1961.11.431, MR 0126765 . ^ Wenninger, Magnus J. (1974), Polyhedron Models, Cambridge University Press, p. 1, ISBN 9780521098595 . ^ Seidel, Raimund (1986), "Constructing higher-dimensional convex hulls at logarithmic cost per face", Proceedings of the Eighteenth Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing (STOC '86), pp. 404–413, doi:10.1145/12130.12172 . External links[edit] Olshevsky, George, Edge at Glossary for Hyperspace. Weisstein, Eric W., "Polygonal edge", MathWorld. Weisstein, Eric W., "Polyhedral edge", MathWorld. Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Edge_(geometry)&oldid=718619324" Categories: Elementary geometry Multi-dimensional geometry Polytopes Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Article Talk Variants Views Read Edit View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Featured content Current events Random article Donate to Wikipedia Wikipedia store Interaction Help About Wikipedia Community portal Recent changes Contact page Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Cite this page Print/export Create a book Download as PDF Printable version Languages Адыгэбзэ العربية Aymar aru Català Čeština Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Kreyòl ayisyen Latviešu Lietuvių Македонски Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Русский Simple English Slovenščina کوردیی ناوەندی Suomi Svenska తెలుగు Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links This page was last modified on 4 May 2016, at 15:56. Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view