Elliptical trainer - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Elliptical trainer From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to: navigation, search This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (December 2008) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) Commercial elliptical trainer (rear drive version) Row of elliptical trainers at a gym (right) ElliptiGO trainers are elliptical but not stationary. An elliptical trainer or cross-trainer (also called an X-trainer) is a stationary exercise machine used to simulate stair climbing, walking, or running without causing excessive pressure to the joints, hence decreasing the risk of impact injuries. For this reason, people with some injuries can use an elliptical to stay fit, as the low impact affects them little. Elliptical trainers offer a non-impact cardiovascular workout that can vary from light to high intensity based on the speed of the exercise and the resistance preference set by the user. Elliptical trainers first entered the market in the 1990s, invented by Precor.[1] Most elliptical trainers work the user's upper and lower body (although some models do not have moving upper body components). Though elliptical trainers are considered to be minimal-impact, they are an example of a weight-bearing form of exercise.[2] They can be self-powered by user-generated motion or need to be plugged in for adjustment of motion and/or for supplying their electronic consoles and resistance systems. Contents 1 History 2 Types 3 Benefits 4 Common usage 5 See also 6 References History[edit] Elliptical riders use an arrangement of links known to the kinematics community as four-bar linkage. The pedals are attached to the floating link referred to as the coupler. The first published work on the subject of elliptical path generation is given in 1988 by researchers at Purdue University in which the path of a point on the floating link is shown to approximately follow an elliptical shape.[3] In 1995, Precor introduced the Elliptical Fitness Crosstrainer (EFX),[4] the first piece of exercise equipment to allow the foot to roll from heel to toe just like in running. Its patented mechanism weds a rear flywheel with a forward foot pedal, creating a smooth, elliptical movement. This is key to foot comfort and reduces numbing of the foot experienced on other stationary cardio equipment. This approach is classified as "low impact" as it keeps a person's heels in contact with the pedals, reducing muscle and tendon stress. Exercisers move fluidly and can have a lower Relative Perceived Exertion (RPE). In other words, the person does not feel like they are working as hard as they actually are. Types[edit] This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (January 2016) There are three types of elliptical trainers, categorized by the motor or "drive" location. The oldest elliptical design is the "rear drive" type. The "front-drive" elliptical was the second generation design. The latest design technology is the "center-drive". On some models, the incline of sloping roller ramps beneath the pedal-links can be adjusted to produce varying pedal motion paths. The adjustable ramp, whether automatic or manual, alters the angle of the elliptical path and increases hip actuation as well as lengthens the stride. This allows an exerciser to alter his or her workout to target the various major lower body muscles. Various elliptical trainers enable exercisers to use preset programs to automatically vary incline, resistance and stride length over the course of a workout. Some trainers can be driven in either a reverse or forward direction. Elliptical trainers are primarily driven via the legs, and most are combination designs having handle-levers attached to each pedal-link to enable a burden on the arms to provide a secondary source of driving power. The user grips the handles below shoulder height and pushes and pulls them while shuffling the feet back and forth within elliptically-shaped paths. Thus the oscillating handle motions are dependently coordinated with the constrained pedal motions. Poorly designed machines are too dependent on the user's leg power, producing excessive handle speeds due to mechanical ratios that do not provide enough advantage to the handle-levers. Consequently such machines feel to the user as if his or her arms are simply going along for the ride, rather than sharing in the work. The better models offer a harmonious combination of arm and leg exercise in the correct ratios. Some manufacturers produce durable commercial models with extensive programs and made to withstand frequent use in a fitness club environment, at prices typically in excess of US$4,000. Models are available for home use at prices starting at about US$200. Benefits[edit] An elliptical cross trainer is comparable to a treadmill in its exertion of leg muscles and the heart.[citation needed] Ellipticals produce an intermediate range of leg motion between that of stationary bikes and treadmills.[5] Studies have found that the rate at which calories are burned on an elliptical trainer is similar to that on a treadmill.[medical citation needed] Thomas Altena, a professor of nutritional and exercise physiology at the University of Missouri-Columbia, measured oxygen retention, lactic acid build-up, heart rate, and perceived rate of exertion to compare treadmills and elliptical trainers,[6] finding that the "physiological responses associated with elliptical exercise were nearly identical to treadmill exercise".[6] However, it is important that the resistance set on the elliptical machine is at a relatively high setting, depending on the user.[7] Since users do not take their feet off the pedals, there is no footfall noise in contrast with other fitness trainers such as treadmills. A 2002 study by the University of Idaho[8] shows that varying the stride length on the elliptical trainer can recruit a larger variety of muscle groups. The study also showed that as the stride is lengthened, more calories are burned without any higher rate of perceived exertion by the user. This study is in agreement with the claims made about the adjustable stride length feature on some newer ellipticals. Common usage[edit] This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (January 2016) Though procedures vary between various models, most are similar in that the user adopts a comfortable standing position with his or her spine in a neutral position (with a straight back). The user aligns their knees, hips and ankles; and ensures that their weight is distributed between the heels and the balls of the feet. The user grips the handrails in a smooth controlled motion, striding either in a forward or reverse motion, working through a full natural range of movement smoothly and continuously. See also[edit] Cross-training ElliptiGO StreetStrider Treadle bicycle Weight training References[edit] ^ Wallack, Roy (April 27, 2013). "The latest in popular ellipticals". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved December 2, 2013.  ^ Briley, John L. (July 27, 2004). "Bone Health: A Weight-Bearing Argument". The Washington Post. Retrieved 2008-12-12.  ^ Farhang, K., Midha, A., and Hall, A. S., Jr., l988b, "Synthesis of Harmonic Motion Generating Linkages-Part II: Path and Motion Generation," ASME Journal of Mechanisms, Transmissions, and Automation in Design, Vol. 110, No. 1, pp. 22-27. ^ "Paul Byrne, Precor President to Retire in September". IHRSA Blog. May 14, 2013.  ^ "Is the Elliptical the Best for Cardio Respiratory Fitness?". EllipticalHub. Retrieved May 29, 2015.  ^ a b "Treadmills vs. Elliptical Trainers". American Fitness 20 (4). July–August 2002. p. 9.  ^ "Elliptical Trainers: Keep Up the Resistance". Gym Source. Retrieved 10 January 2014.  ^ Browder, K. D; D. G Dolny (2002). "Lower extremity muscle activation during elliptical trainer exercise". Medicine & Science in Sports & Exercise 34 (5): S35. doi:10.1097/00005768-200205001-00198.  Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Elliptical_trainer&oldid=714971578" Categories: Exercise equipment Hidden categories: Articles needing additional references from December 2008 All articles needing additional references Articles needing additional references from January 2016 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from July 2014 Articles with unsourced statements from February 2014 Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Article Talk Variants Views Read Edit View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Featured content Current events Random article Donate to Wikipedia Wikipedia store Interaction Help About Wikipedia Community portal Recent changes Contact page Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Cite this page Print/export Create a book Download as PDF Printable version Languages Dansk Deutsch Español עברית Lietuvių Nederlands Português Русский Svenska Українська Edit links This page was last modified on 12 April 2016, at 22:44. Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view