LGBT symbols - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia LGBT symbols From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to: navigation, search Part of a series on Lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender (LGBT) people Sexual orientation Homosexuality Bisexuality Demographics Biology Environment History LGBT history Timeline Social movements Culture LGBT community Coming out Pride Slang Symbols Gay village Same-sex relationship Rights Laws around the world Marriage Union Adoption LGBT parenting Military service Legal aspects of transgenderism Intersex human rights Social attitudes Heteronormativity LGBT stereotypes Queer Religion and homosexuality Religion and transgender Prejudice / Violence AIDS stigma Anti-intersex Biphobia Genderism Heterosexism Homophobia Lesbophobia Binarism Sexualism Suicide among LGBT youth Transphobia Violence against LGBT people LGBT trafficking Academic fields and discourse LGBT/Queer studies Lesbian feminism Queer theory Transfeminism Lavender linguistics LGBT portal v t e The LGBT community has adopted certain symbols for self-identification which demonstrate unity, pride, shared values, and allegiance to one another. LGBTQ symbols communicate ideas, concepts, and identity both within their communities and to mainstream culture. The two most-recognized international LGBTQ symbols are the pink triangle and the rainbow flag. The pink triangle, employed by the Nazis in World War II as a badge of shame, was re-appropriated but retained negative connotations. The rainbow flag, previously used as a symbol of unity between all people, was adopted to be a more organic and natural replacement without any negativity attached to it. Contents 1 Triangles used for persecution during the Nazi regime 2 Labrys 3 Lambda 4 Purple hand 5 Pride flag and colors 5.1 Rainbow flag 5.2 Pride colors 5.2.1 Freedom rings 6 Bisexuality 7 Pansexuality 8 Gender symbols 8.1 Transgender 8.1.1 Other 9 Intersex 10 Leather subculture 11 Bear culture 12 Butch and femme 13 Asexuality 14 Other symbols 15 Flag gallery 16 See also 17 References 18 External links Triangles used for persecution during the Nazi regime[edit] LGBT symbols             Rainbow flag Bisexual flag Pink triangle Black triangle Labrys Lambda Bear flag Leather flag Transgender flags Intersex flag Asexual flag Safe-space v t e Main articles: Pink triangle and Persecution of homosexuals in Nazi Germany and the Holocaust One of the oldest of these symbols is the pink triangle, which originated from the Nazi concentration camp badges that male homosexuals were required to wear on their clothing.[1] Many of the estimated 5–15,000 gay men and lesbian women imprisoned in concentration camps died during the Holocaust.[2] For this reason, the pink triangle is used as an identification symbol and as a memento to remind both its wearers and the general public of the atrocities that gays suffered under Nazi persecutors.[citation needed] AIDS Coalition to Unleash Power (ACT-UP) adopted the inverted pink triangle to symbolize the "active fight back" against HIV/AIDS "rather than a passive resignation to fate."[this quote needs a citation] The pink triangle was used exclusively with male prisoners—lesbians were not included under Paragraph 175, a statute which made homosexual acts between males a crime. The United States Holocaust Memorial Museum stipulates that this is because women were seen as subordinate to men, and that the Nazi state feared lesbians less than gay men. However, the USHMM also claims that many women were arrested and imprisoned for "asocial" behaviour, a label which was applied to women who did not conform to the ideal Nazi image of a woman: cooking, cleaning, kitchen work, child raising, and passivity. These women were labeled with a black triangle.[3] Lesbians reclaimed this symbol for themselves as gay men reclaimed the pink triangle.[citation needed] Pink Triangle Black Triangle Pink & Yellow Triangles The pink triangle was originally used to denote homosexual men as a Nazi concentration camp badge. The black triangle was used to mark "asocial" and "workshy" individuals, including lesbians, Romani and others in the camps. It has been adapted as a lesbian symbol. The pink triangle overlapping a yellow triangle was used to tag Jewish homosexuals in Nazi concentration camps. Labrys[edit] The labrys, or double-bladed battle axe, was a symbol used in the ancient civilization of Minoan Crete (sometimes portrayed as having certain matriarchal tendencies). It represents lesbian and feminist strength and self-sufficiency.[4] It has been in use since the late 1970s. Some lesbians have it tattooed on their inner wrist while others wear it as a pendant.[5] Lambda[edit] In the early 1970s, graphic designer Tom Doerr selected the Greek letter lambda to be the symbol of the New York chapter of the Gay Activists Alliance[6] The alliance's literature states that Doerr chose the symbol specifically for its denotative meaning in the context of chemistry and physics: “a complete exchange of energy--that moment or span of time witness to absolute activity,"[6] Within the STEM field, the lambda symbol is associated with the half-life parameter of exponential random variables, which describes the time it takes for a state to change. In December 1974, the lambda was officially declared the international symbol for gay and lesbian rights by the International Gay Rights Congress in Edinburgh, Scotland.[7] The gay rights organization Lambda Legal and the American Lambda Literary Foundation derive their names from this symbol. Purple hand[edit] See also: Gay Mafia On 31 October 1969, sixty members of the Gay Liberation Front (GLF) and the Society for Individual Rights (SIR) staged a protest outside the offices of the San Francisco Examiner in response to another in a series of news articles disparaging LGBT people in San Francisco's gay bars and clubs.[8][9] The peaceful protest against the "homophobic editorial policies" of the Examiner turned tumultuous and were later called "Friday of the Purple Hand" and "Bloody Friday of the Purple Hand".[9][10][11][12][13] Examiner employees "dumped a bag of printers' ink from the third story window of the newspaper building onto the crowd".[9][11] Some reports state that it was a barrel of ink poured from the roof of the building.[14] The protesters "used the ink to scrawl 'Gay Power' and other slogans on the building walls" and stamp purple hand prints "throughout downtown San Francisco" resulting in "one of the most visible demonstrations of gay power".[9][11][13] According to Larry LittleJohn, then president of SIR, "At that point, the tactical squad arrived – not to get the employees who dumped the ink, but to arrest the demonstrators. Somebody could have been hurt if that ink had gotten into their eyes, but the police were knocking people to the ground."[9] The accounts of police brutality include women being thrown to the ground and protesters' teeth being knocked out.[9][15] Inspired by Black Hand extortion methods of Camorra gangsters and the Mafia,[16] some gay and lesbian activists attempted to institute "purple hand" as a warning to stop anti-gay attacks, with little success. In Turkey, the LGBT rights organization MorEl Eskişehir LGBTT Oluşumu (Purple Hand Eskişehir LGBT Formation), also bears the name of this symbol.[17] Pride flag and colors[edit] Original eight-stripe version designed by Gilbert Baker in 1978 Version with hot pink removed due to fabric unavailability. (1978–1979) Six-color version popular since 1979. Yet another stripe is reduced to have an even number, as to prevent middle colors from being hidden when hung vertically on lampposts. Indigo is interchangeable with a royal or navy blue in this version. Rainbow flag[edit] Gilbert Baker designed the rainbow flag for the 1978 San Francisco Gay Freedom Celebration. The flag does not depict an actual rainbow. Rather, the colors of the rainbow are displayed as horizontal stripes, with red at the top and violet at the bottom. It represents the diversity of gays and lesbians around the world. In the original eight-color version, pink stood for sexuality, red for life, orange for healing, yellow for the sun, green for nature, turquoise for art, indigo for harmony, and violet for the soul.[18] The original eight-color rainbow flag flies over the Castro in San Francisco and from the Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, and Transgender Community Center in New York City. Pride colors[edit] Pride colors as part of a street sign in the Washington Square West neighborhood of Philadelphia, in the United States The Pride colors are also used on objects other than flags to symbolize LGBT pride, community, or solidarity. Freedom rings[edit] Freedom rings, designed by David Spada, are six aluminum rings, each in one of the colors of the rainbow flag. They were released in 1991.[19] Symbolizing happiness and diversity, these rings are worn by themselves or as part of necklaces, bracelets, and key chains.[19] They are sometimes referred to as "Fruit Loops".[20] For National Coming Out Day (held in the United States on 11 October) students have made home-made versions of the "freedom rings" with Froot Loops cereal.[citation needed] Bisexuality[edit] First unveiled on 5 December 1998,[21] the bisexual pride flag was designed by Michael Page to represent bisexuals. This rectangular flag consists of a broad magenta stripe at the top, a broad stripe in blue at the bottom, and a narrower deep lavender band occupying the central fifth. Though the flag is often seen as blue for opposite gender attraction, and pink for same gender attraction, and purple for a mix of the two, this is a common misconception and there is little evidence that supports this.[21] The blue and pink overlapping triangle symbol represents bisexuality and bi pride. The exact origin of this symbol, sometimes facetiously referred to as the "biangles", remains ambiguous. The bisexual moon symbol was created to avoid the use of the Nazi-originated pink triangle.[22] Pansexuality[edit] The pansexual pride flag has been found on various Internet sites since mid-2010.[23] It has three horizontal bars that are pink, yellow and blue.[24] The pink band symbolizes women, the blue men, and the yellow those of a non-binary gender, such as agender, bigender or genderfluid.[23][25][26][27][28] Gender symbols[edit] This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (November 2010) For more details on sex and gender symbols, see Gender symbols § Other gender-related symbols. Modifications of the classical gender symbol (based on astrological symbols, Mars for male and Venus for female) have appeared to express various LBGT gender identities since the 1990s. Two interlocking male symbols form a gay male symbol. Two interlocking female symbols form a lesbian symbol. Variations on this theme can be used to represent bisexuals, transgender persons, as well as heterosexuals. Transgender[edit] Popular symbols used to identify Intersex and transgender people frequently consist of modified gender symbols combining elements from both the male and female symbols. One version, originating from a drawing by Holly Boswell in 1993, depicts a circle with an arrow projecting from the top-right, as per the male symbol, and a cross projecting from the bottom, as per the female symbol, with an additional struck arrow (combining the female cross and male arrow) projecting from the top-left. Unicode: [⚧]=[U+26A7] Another version, modified from the original to include those not on the gender spectrum at all, those without genders, was created by Rumpus Parable in 2013. Other[edit] Another transgender symbol is the Transgender Pride flag designed by transgender woman Monica Helms in 1999[29] and was first shown at a pride parade in Phoenix, Arizona, USA in 2000.[30] It was flown from a large public flagpole in San Francisco's Castro District beginning November 19, 2012 in commemoration of the Transgender Day of Remembrance.[30] The flag represents the transgender community and consists of five horizontal stripes: two light blue, two pink, with a white stripe in the center. Helms described the meaning of the flag as follows: “ The stripes at the top and bottom are light blue, the traditional color for baby boys. The stripes next to them are pink, the traditional color for baby girls. The stripe in the middle is white, for those who are intersex, transitioning or consider themselves having a neutral or undefined gender. The pattern is such that no matter which way you fly it, it is always correct, signifying us finding correctness in our lives.[30] ” Santa Clara County became the first county government in the U.S. to raise the transgender pride flag in 2016.[31] Jennifer Pellinen created an alternative design in 2002. This design is often seen as being more inclusive across the spectrum of the trans community and is becoming more popular as an alternative trans flag to cover the wider trans spectrum.[citation needed] The colors of the flag are seen as more representative of being trans masculine (as well as trans feminine), and representing gender queer and people who sit across the spectrum with a non-fixed gender presentation. Other transgender symbols include the butterfly (symbolizing transformation or metamorphosis), a set of three hexagons representing the chemical pattern of estrogen and testosterone, and a pink and light blue yin and yang symbol.[citation needed] Also under the trans or transgender umbrella are all those who identify off the gender binary. There are many different identities within this category including genderqueer, two-spirit, gender fluid, third gender, and androgyny.[32] Within the transgender umbrella, gender fluid is a subgroup in the genderqueer community.[32] The Gender Fluid flag consists of five stripes. This flag represents the fluctuations and the flexibility of gender in gender fluid people. The first stripe is pink which represents femininity, or feeling female. The second stripe is white, and represents the lack of gender, including agender, or gender neutral. The third stripe is purple and represents a combination of masculinity and femininity including various degrees of androgyny. The fourth stripe is black and represents all other genders, third genders, and pangender. Lastly the final stripe is blue and represents masculinity or feeling male. The flag was designed by JJ Poole in 2012.[33] Intersex[edit] Main article: Intersex Pride flag Intersex people are those who do not exhibit all the biological characteristics of male or female, or exhibit a combination of characteristics, at birth. They are estimated by some to be about 1% of the population.[34] The Intersex flag was created by Organisation Intersex International Australia in July 2013 to create a flag "that is not derivative, but is yet firmly grounded in meaning". The organisation aimed to create a symbol without gendered pink and blue colors. It describes yellow and purple as the "hermaphrodite" colors. The organisation describes it as freely available "for use by any intersex person or organisation who wishes to use it, in a human rights affirming community context"[35][36][37] Leather subculture[edit] Leather culture denotes practices and styles of dress organized around sexual activities and eroticism ("kink"). Wearing leather garments is one way that participants in this culture distinguish themselves from mainstream sexual cultures. Leather culture is most visible in gay communities and most often associated with gay men ("leathermen"), but it is not exclusive to the LGBT community.[38] Many people associate leather culture with BDSM practice. For others, wearing black leather clothing is an erotic fashion that expresses heightened masculinity, the appropriation of sexual power, love of motorcycles and independence, engagement in sexual kink, or leather fetishism.[39] The Leather Pride Flag was designed by Tony DeBlase, who presented the design at the International Mr. Leather event in Chicago, Illinois on 28 May 1989. “ The flag is composed of nine horizontal stripes of equal width. From the top and from the bottom, the stripes alternate black and royal blue. The central stripe is white. In the upper left quadrant of the flag is a large red heart. I will leave it to the viewer to interpret the colors and symbols. ” — Tony DeBlase Bear culture[edit] Bears marching in San Francisco Pride 2004 Main article: Bear (gay culture) Bear is an affectionate gay slang term for those in the bear communities, a subculture in the gay community and an emerging subset of the LGBT community with its own events, codes, and culture-specific identity. Bears tend to have hairy bodies and facial hair; some are heavy-set; some project an image of working-class masculinity in their grooming and appearance, though none of these are requirements or unique indicators. The bear concept can function as an identity, an affiliation, and an ideal to live up to. There is ongoing debate in bear communities about what constitutes a bear. Some state that self-identifying as a bear is the only requirement, while others argue that bears must have certain physical characteristics, such as a hairy chest and face, a large body, or a certain mode of dress and behavior. Bears are almost always gay or bisexual men; transgender]] men (regardless of their sexuality) and those who shun labels for gender and sexuality are increasingly included within bear communities. The bear community has spread all over the world, with bear clubs in many countries. Bear clubs often serve as social and sexual networks for older, hairier, sometimes heavier gay and bisexual men, and members often contribute to their local gay communities through fundraising and other functions. Bear events are common in heavily gay communities. The International Bear Brotherhood Flag was designed in 1995 by Craig Byrnes.[40] Butch and femme[edit] The website Butch-Femme.com uses a black triangle in a red circle to represent butch–femme sexuality.[41] Asexuality[edit] Main article: Asexuality In August 2010, after a process of getting the word out beyond the Asexual Visibility and Education Network (AVEN)[42] and to non-English speaking areas, a flag was chosen[43] following a vote on a non-AVEN site.[44] It has since been seen used on Tumblr in various LGBTQ areas, but had been seen alongside other Sexual Orientations flags previous to formal election.[45] The black stripe represents asexuality, the grey stripe the grey-area between sexual and asexual, the white stripe sexuality, and the purple stripe community. The AVEN logo is a triangle fading from white to black to symbolise the gradient between sexuals, gray-asexuals, demisexuals and asexuals. The ace of spades and ace of hearts are also used as asexual symbols since "ace" is a phonetic shortening of asexual. Generally, romantic asexuals use the ace of hearts as their symbol and aromantic asexuals use the ace of spades.[46] Other symbols[edit] In addition to major symbols of the LGBT community, less-popular symbols have been used to represent members’ unity, pride, shared values, and allegiance to one another. An inverted pink triangle surrounded by a green circle is used to symbolize alliance with gay rights and space free from homophobia. Gay activists in Boston chose the purple rhinoceros as a symbol of the gay movement after conducting a media campaign in 1974. They selected this animal because, although it is sometimes misunderstood, it is docile and intelligent – but when a rhinoceros is angered, it fights ferociously. Lavender was used because it was a widely recognized gay pride color; the heart was added to represent love and the "common humanity of all people."[this quote needs a citation] A lavender rhino was a recognized symbol of lesbianism in the 1970s.[47] In ancient Rome, as in 19th-century England, green indicated homosexual affiliations. Victorian men would often pin a green carnation on their lapel as popularized by author Oscar Wilde, who often wore one on his lapel.[48] According to some interpretations, American poet Walt Whitman used the calamus plant to represent homoerotic love.[49] Bisexual women and lesbians used to give violets to the woman they were wooing, symbolizing their "Sapphic" desire. In a poem, Sappho described herself and a lover wearing garlands of violets. The giving of violets was popular from the 1910s to the 1950s.[50] In Israel the transgender and genderqueer community use a neon green flag and neon green colors. In the Society for Creative Anachronism, LGBT members often wear a blue feather to indicate an affiliation with Clan Blue Feather, a group of SCA members promoting the study of LGBT culture and people in the Middle Ages. In the United Kingdom, since 2006 the Pink Jack has been widely used to represent a uniquely British LGBT identity.[51][52][53] Flag gallery[edit] LGBT Bisexual Pansexual Polysexual Asexual Transgender Alternative Transgender Genderqueer Intersex Alternative Intersex Genderfluid Agender Bear Brotherhood Leather Lesbian Lipstick Lesbian Israeli transgender and genderqueer Gay pride flag of South Africa See also[edit] LGBT portal Hanky code LGBT slogans White Knot References[edit] ^ Plant, Richard (1988). The pink triangle: the Nazi war against homosexuals (revised ed.). H. Holt. p. 175. ISBN 978-0-8050-0600-1.  ^ "Nazi Persecution of Homosexuals 1933-1945". Ushmm.org. Retrieved 2012-01-23.  ^ "LESBIANS AND THE THIRD REICH". ushmm.org. USHMM. Retrieved 16 January 2015.  ^ "Origin of Gay & Lesbian Symbols". swade.net. Retrieved 22 January 2012.  ^ "Lesbian Symbols". Sapphooflesbos.com. 1978-06-25. Retrieved 2012-01-23.  ^ a b Rapp, Linda (2004). "Gay Activists Alliance" (PDF). The GLBTQ Encyclopedia Project. Glbtq, Inc.  ^ Zimmerman, Bonnie, ed. (1999). "Symbols". Encyclopedia of Lesbian and Gay Histories and Cultures (1 ed.). Abingdon: Routledge. p. 747. ISBN 978-0815340553.  ^ Gould, Robert E. (24 February 1974). What We Don't Know About Homosexuality. New York Times Magazine. Retrieved 2008-01-01.  ^ a b c d e f Alwood, Edward (1996). Straight News: Gays, Lesbians, and the News Media. Columbia University; ISBN 0-231-08436-6. Retrieved 2008-01-01.  ^ Bell, Arthur (28 March 1974). Has The Gay Movement Gone Establishment?. Village Voice. Retrieved 2008-01-01.  ^ a b c Van Buskirk, Jim (2004). "Gay Media Comes of Age". Bay Area Reporter. Retrieved 2008-01-01.  ^ Friday of the Purple Hand. The San Francisco Free Press. November 15–30, 1969. Retrieved 2008-01-01.  courtesy the Gay Lesbian Historical Society. ^ a b ""Gay Power" Politics". GLBTQ, Inc. 30 March 2006. Retrieved 2008-01-01.  ^ Montanarelli, Lisa; Ann Harrison (2005). Strange But True San Francisco: Tales of the City by the Bay. Globe Pequot; ISBN 0-7627-3681-X. Retrieved 2008-01-01.  ^ Newspaper Series Surprises Activists. The Advocate. 24 April 1974. Retrieved 2008-01-01.  ^ Jay Robert Nash, World Encyclopedia of Organized Crime, Da Capo Press, 1993. ISBN 0-306-80535-9 ^ "MorEl Eskişehir LGBTT Oluşumu". Moreleskisehir.blogspot.com. Retrieved 2012-01-23.  ^ "Carleton College: Gender and Sexuality Center: Symobls of Pride of the LGBTQ Community". Apps.carleton.edu. 2005-04-26. Retrieved 2012-01-23.  ^ a b Van Gelder, Lindsy (1992-06-21), "Thing; Freedom Rings", New York Times, retrieved 2010-07-21  ^ Green, Jonathon (2006). Cassell's Dictionary of Slang. Sterling Publishing Company, Inc. ISBN 0-304-36636-6. Retrieved 2007-11-15.  ^ a b "History, Bi Activism, Free Graphics". BiFlag.com. 1998-12-05. Archived from the original on 2012-02-04. Retrieved 2012-01-23.  ^ Koymasky, Matt; Koymasky Andrej (2006-08-14). "Gay Symbols: Other Miscellaneous Symbols". Retrieved 2007-02-18.  ^ a b "Do You Have a Flag?". 9 November 2012. Retrieved 17 July 2014.  ^ "Pansexual Pride Day". Shenandoah University. Retrieved 17 July 2014.  ^ "A field guide to Pride flags". 27 June 2013. Retrieved 17 July 2014.  ^ "A Storied Glossary of Iconic LGBT Flags and Symbols". 13 June 2014. Retrieved 17 July 2014.  ^ "Cantú Queer Center - Sexuality Resources". Retrieved 17 July 2014.  ^ "Gay & Lesbian Pride Symbols - Common Pride Symbols and Their Meanings". Retrieved 17 July 2014.  ^ Fairyington, Stephanie (12 November 2014). "The Smithsonian's Queer Collection". The Advocate. Retrieved 5 June 2015.  ^ a b c "Transgender Flag Flies In San Francisco's Castro District After Outrage From Activists" by Aaron Sankin, HuffingtonPost, November 20, 2012 ^ "The Bay Area Reporter Online - Santa Clara is first county in US to raise trans flag". Bay Area Reporter.  ^ a b GENDERQUEER AND NON-BINARY IDENTITIES - Genderqueer Identities & Terminology ^ [1] Archived October 7, 2013, at the Wayback Machine. ^ "How common is intersex? | Intersex Society of North America". Isna.org. Retrieved 2009-08-21.  ^ An intersex flag, Organisation Intersex International Australia, 5 July 2013 ^ Are you male, female or intersex?, Amnesty International Australia, 11 July 2013 ^ Intersex advocates address findings of Senate Committee into involuntary sterilisation, Gay News Network, 28 October 2013 ^ "Symbols of the Gay, Lesbian, Bisexual, and Transgender Movements.". Lambda.org. Archived from the original on 4 December 2004. Retrieved 26 December 2004.  ^ "Elegy for the Valley of Kings," by Gayle Rubin, in In Changing Times: Gay Men and Lesbians Encounter HIV/AIDS, ed. Levine et al., University of Chicago Press ^ "Flag History". Bearmfg.com. Retrieved 2012-01-23.  ^ "Gender Terms and Linguistics". Butch-Femme.com. Retrieved 2012-01-23.  ^ "The Creation of a Flag". Apositive.org. Retrieved 2012-01-23.  ^ "Asexual Flag: And the winner is". Asexuality.org. Retrieved 2012-01-23.  ^ "Asexual Flag - Round Three". Asexuality.org. Retrieved 2012-01-23.  ^ Queer Secrets ^ AVEN. "AVEN Wiki". Retrieved 30 June 2012.  ^ [2] Archived August 12, 2012, at the Wayback Machine. ^ Stetz, Margaret D. (Winter 2000). Oscar Wilde at the Movies: British Sexual Politics and The Green Carnation (1960); Biography – Volume 23, Number 1, Winter 2000, pp. 90–107. Retrieved 14 June 2010. ^ Herrero-Brasas, Juan A. (2010). Walt Whitman's Mystical Ethics of Comradeship: Homosexuality and the Marginality of Friendship at the Crossroads of Modernity. SUNY. p. 46. ISBN 978-1-4384-3011-9.  ^ "Lesbian Symbols". Archived from the original on April 23, 2012.  ^ "God save the queers". PinkNews.co.uk. 2006-07-21. Retrieved 2012-01-23.  ^ Pink Jack (actual flag): Archived January 21, 2016, at the Wayback Machine. ^ Pink Jack (image): External links[edit] Wikimedia Commons has media related to LGBT symbols. Origin & History of Gay & Lesbian Symbols shows images of some of these symbols and offers a brief historical account of each. v t e Lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender (LGBT) topics   Academic fields Discourse LGBT topics in education Gender studies Lavender linguistics Lesbian feminism LGBT literature LGBT/Queer studies Queer theory Transfeminism   Community Culture Anthems Bars Bisexual community Coming out Community center Drag king Drag queen Fiction topics Gay friendly Icons Lesbian utopia Literature Music Neighborhoods Organizations Periodicals Pride Pride parade Religious groups Rodeos Same-sex relationships Slang List of slang terms Slogans Sports Symbols Tourism Category:LGBT culture   Gender identities Sexual identities Gender identities Male Female Androgyne Bigender Boi Cisgender Cross-dresser Gender bender Gender neutrality Genderqueer Pangender Trans man Trans woman Transgender Transsexual Womyn Third sex / Third gender Akava'ine Androgynos Bakla Bissu Eunuch Fa'afafine Fakaleiti Femminiello Hijra Kathoey Khanith Köçek Mahu Mak nyah Mukhannathun Muxe Sworn virgins Takatāpui Tomboy Travesti Tumtum Two-Spirit Winkte Sexual orientation identities Sexual orientations Asexual Bisexual Heterosexual Homosexual Attraction to transgender people Banjee Bi-curious Ex-gay Ex-ex-gay Gay Heteroflexible Lesbian Monosexual Non-heterosexual Pansexual Polyamorous Queer Questioning Romantic orientation Same gender loving Related Erotic target location error Gender roles Human female sexuality Human male sexuality Sexuality and gender identity-based cultures Intersex Hermaphrodite   History LGBT history History of lesbianism LGBT history timeline Social movements History of Christianity and homosexuality History of same-sex unions Pederasty Category:LGBT history Pre-modern era Adelphopoiesis Homosexuality in ancient Egypt Homosexuality in ancient Greece Homosexuality in ancient Peru Homosexuality in ancient Rome Homosexuality in medieval Europe 16th to 19th century Mollies Urnings 20th century Homosexuals in Nazi Germany and the Holocaust Sea queens Stonewall riots Festival of Light action White Night riots 21st century Timeline of same-sex marriage   Rights Legal issues LGBT rights by country or territory Africa Americas Asia Europe Oceania List of LGBT rights articles by region LGBT rights topics Adoption Civil unions and partnerships Hate crime laws Intersex human rights Legal aspects of transgenderism Military service Parenting Same-sex marriage Socialism Sodomy laws United Nations/Yogyakarta Principles La Francophonie Commonwealth of Nations LGBT rights movements Homophile Gay liberation LGBT rights groups LGBT rights activists   Sexual orientations – Medicine, science and sexology Biology Birth order Demographics Environment Heterosexual–homosexual continuum Homosexuality and psychology Kinsey scale Klein Grid Neuroscience Prenatal hormones Sexual inversion Sexual orientation change efforts Sexual orientation identity Timeline of sexual orientation and medicine   Social attitudes Prejudice Violence Social attitudes Anti-LGBT slogans Heteronormativity Gay panic LGBT rights opposition LGBT stereotypes Religion and homosexuality Transgenderism and religion Prejudice and discrimination AIDS stigma Biphobia Genderism Heterosexism Homophobia Internalized homophobia Lesbophobia Non-binary discrimination Riddle scale SPLC-designated list of anti-gay U.S. hate groups Transphobia Violence against LGBT people Corrective rape Death penalty for homosexuality Gay bashing History of violence in the UK History of violence in the US Significant acts of violence against LGBT people Trans bashing Unlawfully killed transgender people LGBT suicides Category:LGBT LGBT portal Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=LGBT_symbols&oldid=719013689" Categories: LGBT symbols Lists of symbols Sexuality flags Human gender and sexuality symbols Hidden categories: All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from January 2015 Articles with unsourced quotes Articles with unsourced statements from July 2010 Articles needing additional references from November 2010 All articles needing additional references Articles with unsourced statements from August 2014 Articles with attributed pull quotes Commons category with local link same as on Wikidata Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Article Talk Variants Views Read Edit View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Featured content Current events Random article Donate to Wikipedia Wikipedia store Interaction Help About Wikipedia Community portal Recent changes Contact page Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Cite this page Print/export Create a book Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Languages العربية Brezhoneg Čeština Cymraeg Ελληνικά Español Esperanto فارسی Français Hrvatski Italiano עברית Lietuvių Magyar 日本語 Polski Português Română Русский Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt Zazaki 中文 Edit links This page was last modified on 7 May 2016, at 01:38. Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view