The Loop (CTA) - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia The Loop (CTA) From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia   (Redirected from The Loop (Chicago Transit Authority)) Jump to: navigation, search The Loop The southeastern corner of The Loop Overview Type Rapid transit System Chicago 'L' Status Operational Locale Chicago, Illinois, USA Stations 8 Services      Orange Line      Green Line      Purple Line weekday rush hours only      Brown Line      Pink Line Daily ridership 74,651 (average weekday 2012) Operation Opened 1895–1897 Operator(s) Chicago Transit Authority Character Elevated Technical Track length 1.79 miles (2.9 km) Number of tracks 2 Track gauge 4 ft 8 1⁄2 in (1,435 mm) standard gauge Minimum radius 90 feet (27 m) Electrification Third rail, 600v DC Route map Legend  Diagram    Clark/Lake Fifth / Lake State / Lake Randolph / Wells Randolph / Wabash Washington / Wells Madison / Wells Madison / Wabash Adams / Wabash Quincy LaSalle / Van Buren Library Dearborn/Van Buren   The Loop (historically Union Loop, or commonly Loop) is the 1.79-mile (2.88 km) long circuit of elevated railroad that forms the hub of the Chicago 'L' rapid transit system in Chicago, Illinois. As of 2012, the branch has served 74,651 passengers every weekday.[1] The Loop is so named because the railroad loops around a rectangle formed by Lake Street (north side), Wabash Avenue (east), Van Buren Street (south), and Wells Street (west). The railroad loop has given its name to Chicago's downtown, which is known as the Loop. Numerous accounts assert that the use of this term predates the elevated railroad, deriving from the multiple cable car turntables, or loops, that terminated in the district, and especially those of two lines that shared a loop, constructed in 1882, bounded by Madison, Wabash, State, and Lake.[2] However, transportation historian Bruce Moffat has concluded that "The Loop" was not used as a proper noun until after Charles Yerkes' 1895–97 construction of the elevated structure.[3] Contents 1 Operations 2 History 3 Station listing 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Operations[edit] Chicago Transit Authority control tower 18 guides Chicago 'L' trains north and southbound Purple and Brown lines intersecting with east and westbound Pink and Green lines and the Orange line above the Wells and Lake street intersection in the loop. A Brown Line train departing from Madison/Wabash Northward view from the Adams/Wabash station at night Loop Elevated, with CNA Center and Old Colony Building An Orange Line train approaches Quincy on the Wells Street portion of the Loop in 2008. A street level view of the elevated trains The Loop includes eight stations: Clark/Lake and State/Lake are on the northern leg; Randolph/Wabash and Adams/Wabash are on the eastern side; Library and LaSalle/Van Buren are on the southern leg; and Quincy and Washington/Wells are on the western side. In 2011 20,896,612 passengers entered the 'L' via these stations. Five of the eight 'L' lines use the Loop tracks. Two of the remaining three lines, Blue Line and Red Line, run underground through the center of the loop, connecting to Loop stations. The Yellow Line is the only CTA line that does not run on or connect to the loop. The Purple Line Express (weekday rush hours only) and the Brown Line enter from the north at the northwestern corner. The Purple Line Express makes a full circuit in the clockwise direction while the Brown Line makes a full circuit traveling counterclockwise. The Orange Line enters from the south at the southeastern corner and the Pink Line enters from the west at the northwestern corner; both making a full clockwise circuit. Following the completion of a full circuit in their directions, trains of these four lines return to their terminals making stops in the reverse order they made when heading to the Loop. The Green Line runs in both directions but does not make a full circuit, using only the north and eastern sides of the Loop to move between the Lake Street branch and the South Side Elevated. Two towers control entry to and exit from the Loop. Tower 12 stands at the southeastern corner. Tower 18 stands watch over the three-quarter union located at the northwestern corner, which at one time was billed as the busiest railroad interlocking in the world.[4] The current Tower 18 was placed into service on September 7, 1969 after being relocated diagonally across the junction from the original 19th century tower.[4] History[edit] Prior to construction of the Union Loop, Chicago's three elevated railway lines—the South Side Elevated Railroad, the Lake Street Elevated Railroad, and the Metropolitan West Side Elevated Railroad—each had their own terminal on the edges of downtown Chicago. Charles Tyson Yerkes masterminded the linking of these railroads.[5] The Union Loop was constructed in separate sections: the Lake Street 'L' was extended along the north side in 1895; the Union Elevated Railroad opened the east side along Wabash Avenue in 1896 and the west side along Wells Street in 1897; and the Union Consolidated Elevated Railroad opened the south side along Van Buren Street in 1897. Originally there were 12 stations, with three stations on each side. The construction of the west-leg of the Union Loop over Wells Street required the removal of the southern platform of the Fifth/Lake station. The addition of the Northwestern Elevated Railroad caused the removal of the rest of the station as the remaining platform sat across the new road's entry point.[6] This left 11 stations, two on the north leg of the loop and three on each other leg. The Loop was born in political scandal: upon completion, all the rail lines running downtown had to pay Yerkes's operation a fee, which raised fares for commuters; when Yerkes, after bribery of the state legislature, secured legislation by which he claimed a fifty-year franchise, the resulting furor drove him out of town and ushered in a short-lived era of "Progressive Reform" in Chicago.[7] Station listing[edit] Chicago Transit Authority Chicago 'L' route map Loop Station Location Points of interest & Notes Randolph/Wells 150 N. Wells St. Closed July 17, 1995; partially demolished and replaced by Washington/Wells Washington/Wells 100 N. Wells Street Chicago City Hall, Civic Opera House, Chicago Mercantile Exchange Transfer for Metra trains via Ogilvie Transportation Center Madison/Wells 1 N. Wells St. Closed January 30, 1994; demolished and replaced by Washington/Wells Quincy 220 S. Wells Street Willis Tower Transfer for Metra and Amtrak trains via Union Station LaSalle/Van Buren 121 W. Van Buren Street Chicago Board of Trade, Chicago Board Options Exchange Transfer for Metra trains via LaSalle Street Station Dearborn/Van Buren Dearborn Street and Van Buren Street Closed 1949, replaced by Library-State/Van Buren on June 22, 1997. Harold Washington Library – State / Van Buren 1 W. Van Buren Street Harold Washington Library Transfer station for Blue and Red Lines. State/Van Buren 400 S. State St. Closed September 2, 1973, Replaced by Library – State / Van Buren on June 22, 1997. Adams/Wabash 201 S. Wabash Avenue Grant Park, Petrillo Music Shell, Buckingham Fountain, Art Institute of Chicago Madison/Wabash 2 N. Wabash Avenue Closed March 16, 2015, Former station between all Loop rail lines. Washington/Wabash TBD Consolidation of Madison/Wabash and Randolph/Wabash scheduled to open in 2017. Future station between all Loop rail lines. Randolph/Wabash 151 N. Wabash Avenue Marshall Field's, Chicago Cultural Center, Millennium Park Transfer for Metra and South Shore trains via Millennium Station, scheduled to close in 2017. State/Lake 200 N. State Street Chicago Theatre, Gene Siskel Film Center, Harold Washington College Transfer station for Red Line Clark/Lake 100 W. Lake Street, Chicago James R. Thompson Center, Richard J. Daley Center Transfer station for Blue Line Fifth/Lake Wells Street and Lake Street Closed December 17, 1899 See also[edit] 1977 Chicago Loop derailment Chicago Central Area Transit Plan Wells Street Terminal References[edit] ^ "2012 Annual Ridership Report" (PDF). Chicago Transit Authority. transitchicago.com. Retrieved January 2, 2014.  ^ Joe Thompson, Cable Car Lines in Chicago ^ Patrick T. Reardon. "It All Starts Downtown". Hartford Courant, July 26, 2004 (from the Chicago Tribune). Accessed 19 March 2009. ^ a b Garfield, Graham. "Tower 18". Chicago-L.org. Retrieved 2010-06-12.  ^ Chicago-"L".org ^ http://chicago-l.org/stations/fifth-lake.html ^ Paul Barrett. "Chicago's Public Transportation Policy, 1900–1940s", 8 Ill. Hist. Teacher 25 (Illinois Historical preservation Agency, 2001). External links[edit] Historic American Engineering Record (HAER) No. IL-1, "Union Elevated Railroad, Union Loop" Loop Elevated at Chicago-L.org v t e Chicago "L" Lines Current      Red Line      Orange Line      Yellow Line      Green Line      Blue Line      Purple Line      Brown Line      Pink Line Defunct Lake–Dan Ryan Howard–Englewood–Jackson Park Branches Current Loop North Side main line South Side main line State Street subway Milwaukee–Dearborn subway Lake Street Elevated Dan Ryan Ravenswood Douglas Ashland/Englewood Cottage Grove/Jackson Park O'Hare Congress Defunct Stock Yards Kenwood Normal Park Market Street Metropolitan main line Garfield Park Westchester Humboldt Park Northwest Randolph Street Cuyler Stations Current stations Former stations Yards 54th Yard 98th Yard Ashland Yard Desplaines Yard Harlem Yard Howard Yard Kimball Yard Linden Yard Midway Yard Rosemont Yard 61st Yard Lower 63rd Yard Skokie Shops Rolling stock Current 2600 series 3200 series 5000-series Future 7000 series Defunct 4000 series 5000 series 6000 series 1-50 series 2000 series 2200 series 2400 series Operators Current Chicago Transit Authority Former Chicago Rapid Transit Company South Side Elevated Railroad Lake Street Elevated Railroad Metropolitan West Side Elevated Railroad Northwestern Elevated Railroad Other Chicago Central Area Transit Plan CTA Holiday Train Mid-City Transitway 1977 Chicago Loop derailment Red Ahead 2014 O'Hare station crash Coordinates: 41°52′48″N 87°38′47″W﻿ / ﻿41.88000°N 87.64639°W﻿ / 41.88000; -87.64639 Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=The_Loop_(CTA)&oldid=716274006" Categories: Chicago Transit Authority Historic American Engineering Record in Illinois Railway loop lines Hidden categories: Articles that mention track gauge 1435 mm Coordinates on Wikidata Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Article Talk Variants Views Read Edit View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Featured content Current events Random article Donate to Wikipedia Wikipedia store Interaction Help About Wikipedia Community portal Recent changes Contact page Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Cite this page Print/export Create a book Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Languages Español Français Nederlands Svenska ไทย Edit links This page was last modified on 20 April 2016, at 20:42. Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view