Outline of sociology - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Outline of sociology From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to: navigation, search See also: Index of sociology articles Sociology History Outline Portal Theory Positivism Antipositivism Postpositivism Functionalism Conflict theories Social constructionism Structuralism Interactionism Critical theory Structure and agency Actor-network theory Methods Quantitative Qualitative Historical Mathematical Computational Ethnography Ethnomethodology Network analysis Subfields Conflict Criminology Culture Development Deviance Demography Education Economic Environmental Family Gender Health Industrial Inequality Knowledge Law Literature Medical Military Organizational Political Race and ethnicity Religion Rural Science Social change Social movements Social psychology Stratification STS Technology Urban Browse Bibliography Index Journals Organizations People Timeline v t e The following outline is provided as an overview of and topical guide to the discipline of sociology: Sociology studies society[1] using various methods of empirical investigation[2] and critical analysis[3] to understand human social activity, from the micro level of individual agency and interaction to the macro level of systems and social structure.[4] Contents 1 Nature of sociology 1.1 Essence of sociology 2 Branches of sociology 2.1 Multidisciplinary and interdisciplinary fields involving sociology 3 History of sociology 4 Theoretical perspectives in sociology 5 General sociology concepts 6 Sociologists 7 Sociological publications 8 Sociological associations 9 Academies 10 Related fields 11 See also 12 References 13 External links Nature of sociology[edit] Sociology can be described as all of the following: The study of society. Academic discipline – body of knowledge given to - or received by - a disciple (student); a branch or sphere of knowledge, or field of study, that an individual has chosen to specialise in. Field of science – widely recognized category of specialized expertise within science, and typically embodies its own terminology and nomenclature. Such a field will usually be represented by one or more scientific journals, where peer reviewed research is published. There are many sociology-related scientific journals. Social science – field of academic scholarship that explores aspects of human society. Essence of sociology[edit] Main article: Sociology Positivism Antipositivism Structural functionalism Conflict theory Public sociology Social research Social theory Feminism Branches of sociology[edit] Analytical sociology Applied sociology Architectural sociology Behavioral sociology Chinese sociology Collective behavior Comparative sociology Computational sociology Critical sociology Cultural sociology Digital sociology Dramaturgical sociology Economic sociology Educational sociology Empirical sociology Environmental sociology Evolutionary sociology Feminist sociology Figurational sociology Historical sociology Humanistic sociology Industrial sociology Internet sociology Interpretive sociology Jealousy sociology Macrosociology Marxist sociology Mathematical sociology Medical sociology Mesosociology Microsociology Military sociology Natural resource sociology Phenomenological sociology Policy sociology Polish sociology Political sociology Psychoanalytic sociology Public sociology Pure sociology Rural sociology Social inequality Social psychology (sociology) Sociology of aging Sociology of agriculture Sociology of architecture Sociology of art Sociology of autism Sociology of childhood Sociology of conflict Sociology of culture Sociology of cyberspace Sociology of deviance Sociology of development Sociology of disaster Sociology of education Sociology of emotions Sociology of fatherhood Sociology of film Sociology of finance Sociology of food Sociology of gender Sociology of generations Sociology of globalization Sociology of government Sociology of health and illness Sociology of human consciousness Sociology of immigration Sociology of knowledge Sociology of language Sociology of law Sociology of leisure Sociology of literature Sociology of markets Sociology of marriage Sociology of motherhood Sociology of music Sociology of natural resources Sociology of organizations Sociology of peace, war, and social conflict Sociology of punishment Sociology of race and ethnic relations Sociology of religion Sociology of risk Sociology of science Sociology of scientific knowledge Sociology of social change Sociology of social movements Sociology of space Sociology of sport Sociology of technology Sociology of terrorism Sociology of the body Sociology of the family Sociology of the history of science Sociology of the Internet Sociology of work Sociography Structural sociology Theoretical sociology Urban sociology Visual sociology Multidisciplinary and interdisciplinary fields involving sociology[edit] Agnotology Agrarian studies Anthrozoology Area studies Behavioral economics Communication studies Community informatics Conflict theory Criminology Critical management studies Cultural studies Demography Development studies Disability studies Environmental studies Food studies Future studies Gender studies Geodemography Global studies Gerontology Human ecology Leisure studies Political ecology Organizational studies Science studies Science, technology and society Social architecture Social conflict theory Social engineering Social epistemology Social geography Social informatics Social philosophy Social studies of finance Social theory Sociobiology Sociocybernetics Sociolinguistics Sociomapping Sociometry Sociomusicology Systems theory Urban studies Victimology World-systems theory History of sociology[edit] History of sociology Ibn Khaldun (1332–1406) – in his Muqaddimah (later translated as Prolegomena in Latin), the introduction to a seven volume analysis of universal history, was the first to advance social philosophy and social science in formulating theories of social cohesion and social conflict. He is thus considered by some to be the forerunner of sociology.[5][6][7][8][9][10] History of sociology in Poland Timeline of sociology Timeline of sociology (1810s) Timeline of sociology (1820s) Timeline of sociology (1830s) Timeline of sociology (1840s) Timeline of sociology (1850s) Timeline of sociology (1860s) Timeline of sociology (1870s) Timeline of sociology (1880s) Timeline of sociology (1890s) Timeline of sociology (1900s) Timeline of sociology (1910s) Timeline of sociology (1920s) Timeline of sociology (1930s) Timeline of sociology (1940s) Timeline of sociology (1950s) Timeline of sociology (1960s) Timeline of sociology (1970s) Timeline of sociology (1980s) Timeline of sociology (1990s) Timeline of sociology (2000s) Theoretical perspectives in sociology[edit] Conflict theory Critical realism Critical theory Cultural theory Ethnomethodology Exchange theory Feminist theory Human ecology Logical positivism Marxist sociology Postcolonialism & subaltern theory Postmodernism Poststructuralism Psychoanalytic sociology Queer theory Rational choice theory Relational sociology Social constructionism Sociocultural evolution Social phenomenology Structural functionalism Structuralism Symbolic interactionism Systems theory World-systems theory General sociology concepts[edit] Attitude Alienation Beliefs Bureaucracy Civil inattention Civil rights Crime Commodity fetishism Community (outline) Consumption (consumerism) Cultural capital Culture (outline) Discrimination Division of labour Equality Exploitation Family Freedom Gemeinschaft and gesellschaft Globalization Group Ideal type Identity Ideology Industrialization Inequality Institution Interpersonal relationship (outline) Justice Lifestyle Mass media Modernity Nature versus nurture Organization Paradigm shift Political economy Popular culture Postmodernity Poverty Power Power-knowledge Racism Rationalisation Reflexivity Religion Secularisation Sexism Social action Social capital Social change Social class Social construction Social cohesion Social control Social environment Social evolutionism Social justice Social media Social mobility Social movement Social network Social order Social organisation Social solidarity Social status Social stratification Social structure Socialization Society (outline) Structure and agency Sustainable development Values World view Sociologists[edit] Main article: List of sociologists Sociological publications[edit] Main article: List of sociology journals Magazines Contexts MANAS Journal Polemic Salmagundi Youth Studies Australia Sociology books Sociological associations[edit] Main article: List of sociological associations Academies[edit] College of Sociology, Paris, 1937–39 New School for Social Research, New York Related fields[edit] Global studies Human geography Law Political science Social anthropology/Cultural anthropology Social history Sociolinguistics Social research See also[edit] Outline of science Bibliography of sociology Index of sociology articles Index of sociology of food articles Index of urban sociology articles References[edit] ^ "Comte, Auguste, A Dictionary of Sociology (3rd Ed), John Scott & Gordon Marshall (eds), Oxford University Press, 2005, ISBN 0-19-860986-8, ISBN 978-0-19-860986-5 ^ Ashley D, Orenstein DM (2005). Sociological theory: Classical statements (6th ed.). Boston, Massachusetts, USA: Pearson Education. pp. 3–5, 32–36.  ^ Ashley D, Orenstein DM (2005). Sociological theory: Classical statements (6th ed.). Boston, Massachusetts, USA: Pearson Education. pp. 3–5, 38–40.  ^ Giddens, Anthony, Duneier, Mitchell, Applebaum, Richard. 2007. Introduction to Sociology. Sixth Edition. New York: W.W. Norton and Company. Chapter 1. ^ H. Mowlana (2001). "Information in the Arab World", Cooperation South Journal 1. ^ Dr. S. W. Akhtar (1997). "The Islamic Concept of Knowledge", Al-Tawhid: A Quarterly Journal of Islamic Thought & Culture 12 (3). ^ Amber Haque (2004), "Psychology from Islamic Perspective: Contributions of Early Muslim Scholars and Challenges to Contemporary Muslim Psychologists", Journal of Religion and Health 43 (4): 357-377 [375]. ^ Enan, Muhammed Abdullah (2007). Ibn Khaldun: His Life and Works. The Other Press. p. v. ISBN 983-9541-53-6.  ^ Alatas, S. H. (2006). "The Autonomous, the Universal and the Future of Sociology". Current Sociology 54: 7–23 [15]. doi:10.1177/0011392106058831.  ^ Warren E. Gates (July–September 1967). "The Spread of Ibn Khaldun's Ideas on Climate and Culture". Journal of the History of Ideas (University of Pennsylvania Press) 28 (3): 415–422 [415]. doi:10.2307/2708627. JSTOR 2708627.  External links[edit] Find more about Sociology at Wikipedia's sister projects Definitions from Wiktionary Media from Commons News stories from Wikinews Quotations from Wikiquote Source texts from Wikisource Textbooks from Wikibooks Learning resources from Wikiversity Electronic Journal of Sociology SocioLog, a directory of sociology resources SocioSite, a directory of sociology resources Sections of American Sociological Association Research Committees and Themes of International Sociological Association, AIS (French) Comités de Recherche de l'Association internationale des sociologues de langue française, AISLF (French) Liste des réseaux thématiques de l'Association Française de Sociologie, AFS Social Phenomena by Teng Wang v t e Outlines General reference Culture and the arts Geography and places Health and fitness History and events Mathematics and logic Natural and physical sciences People and self Philosophy and thinking Religion and belief systems Society and social sciences Technology and applied sciences v t e Social sciences Primary Anthropology archaeology cultural linguistics social Economics Geography human integrative History Law Political science international relations public administration public policy Psychology social Sociology criminology demography internet rural Interdisciplinary Anthrozoology Area studies Business studies Cognitive science Communication studies Community studies Cultural studies Development studies Education Environmental (social science studies) Food studies Gender studies Global studies History of technology Human ecology Information science International studies Media studies Philosophy of science economics history psychology social science Planning land use regional urban Political ecology Political economy Public health Regional science Science and technology studies Science studies historical Social work Other categorizations Humanities Geisteswissenschaft Human science Index Journals Outline Portal WikiProject Wikiversity Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Outline_of_sociology&oldid=704066542" Categories: Outlines Sociology lists Hidden categories: Articles with French-language external links Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Article Talk Variants Views Read Edit View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Featured content Current events Random article Donate to Wikipedia Wikipedia store Interaction Help About Wikipedia Community portal Recent changes Contact page Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Cite this page Print/export Create a book Download as PDF Printable version Languages ქართული Português Edit links This page was last modified on 9 February 2016, at 09:10. Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view