Tape measure - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Tape measure From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to: navigation, search This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (May 2008) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) plastic tape measure (metric) Self-retracting tape measure (imperial) Measuring tape capable of measuring down to 1⁄32 inch (0.79375 mm) Diagram showing fractions of an inch on a standard sixteenth measuring tape A tape measure or measuring tape is a flexible ruler. It consists of a ribbon of cloth, plastic, fiber glass, or metal strip with linear-measurement markings. It is a common measuring tool. Its design allows for a measure of great length to be easily carried in pocket or toolkit and permits one to measure around curves or corners. Today it is ubiquitous, even appearing in miniature form as a keychain fob, or novelty item. Surveyors use tape measures in lengths of over 100 m (300+ ft). Various types of measuring tapes and construction materials are explained at this reference. Contents 1 Uses 2 History 3 Design 3.1 United States 3.2 United Kingdom 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Uses[edit] Tape measures that were intended for use in tailoring or dressmaking were made from flexible cloth or plastic.These types of tape measures were mainly used for the measuring of the human's waist line. Today, measuring tapes made for sewing are made of fiberglass, which does not tear or stretch as easily. Measuring tapes designed for carpentry or construction often use a stiff, curved metallic ribbon that can remain stiff and straight when extended, but retracts into a coil for convenient storage. This type of tape measure will have a floating tang or hook on the end to aid measuring. The tang is connected to the tape with loose rivets through oval holes, and can move a distance equal to its thickness, to provide both inside and outside measurements that are accurate.[1] A tape measure of 25 or even 100 feet can wind into a relatively small container. The self-marking tape measure allows the user an accurate one hand measure. History[edit] Hiram A. Farrand with the Farrand Rapid Rule The first record of a people using a measuring device was by the Romans using marked strips of leather, but this was more like a regular ruler than a tape measure. On July 14, 1868, a patent was filed by one Alvin J. Fellows of New Haven, Connecticut. Fellows' rule, although crude and flimsy, was the first attempt to make a spring tape measure.[2] On 3 January 1922, Hiram A. Farrand received the patent he filed in 1919 for his spring tape measure. Sometime between 1922 and December 1926, Farrand experimented with the help of The Brown Company in Berlin, New Hampshire.[3] It is there Hiram and William Wentworth Brown began mass-producing the tape measure.[4] Their product was later sold to Stanley Works. Design[edit] The basic design on which all modern spring tape measures are built can trace its origins back to an 1868 patent by a New Haven, Connecticut resident named A. J. Fellows. According to the text of his patent, Fellows' tape measure was an improvement on other versions previously designed.[5] The spring tape measure has existed since Fellows' patent in 1868, but its usage did not become very popular due to the difficulty in communication from one town to another. In the early 1900s, carpenters began slowly adopting H. A. Farrand's design as the one more commonly used, which is the design all modern tape measures use today. With the mass production of the integrated circuit (IC) the tape measure has also entered into the digital age with the digital tape measure. Some incorporate a digital screen to give measurement readouts in multiple formats. An early patent for this type of measure was published in 1977.[6] There are also other styles of tape measures that have incorporated lasers and ultrasonic technology to measure the distance of an object with fairly reliable accuracy. United States[edit] A roll-up tape measure being used. Justus Roe, a surveyor and tape-maker by trade, made the longest tape measure in 1956, at 600 feet (180 m).[7] The Northern Virginia Surveyors Association presented the 600-foot, gold-plated surveyor's tape measure to Mickey Mantle in 1956.[8] Some tapes sold in the United States have additional marks in the shape of small black diamonds, which appear every 19.2 inches (49 cm). These are known as "metric layouts" markings[citation needed], and are used to mark out equal truss lengths for roofing materials (five trusses per standard 8-foot (2.4 m) length of building material). Many tapes also have special markings every 16 inches (41 cm), which is a standard interval for studs in housing. United Kingdom[edit] Tape measures sold in the UK often have dual scales for metric and imperial units. Like the American tape measures described above, they also have markings every 16" and 19.2". See also[edit] Tape (surveying) References[edit] ^ Aird, Forbes (1999). Mechanic's guide to precision measuring tools. Osceola, WI: MBI Pub. Co. p. 18. ISBN 9780760305454.  ^ Today in History. "First Spring Tape Measure", Connecticut, 14 July 2009. Retrieved on 24 March 2015. ^ Hiram A. Farrand Inc. (Dec 1930). Popular Science. Popular Science Monthly. Retrieved 3 November 2011.  ^ Walter W. Jacob (Sep 2004). "Stanley Advertising and Imprinted Tape Rules". The Chronicle of the Early American Industries Association. Retrieved 3 November 2011.  ^ Letters Patent No. 79,965. Text Retrieved 26 February 2006. ^ "Electronic read out tape measure". Google Patents. 21 June 1977. Retrieved 3 January 2015.  ^ "Suffolk County News, Via the Grapevine" (PDF). 13 July 1956.  ^ Jane Leavy (2010). The Last Boy: Mickey Mantle and the End of America's Childhood. HarperCollins. p. 91. ISBN 978-0-06-088352-2.  External links[edit] Media related to Tape measures at Wikimedia Commons v t e Metalworking   Tools Cutting machines Bandsaw Cold saw Laser Miter saw Plasma Water jet cutter Cutting tools Broach Burr Chisel Counterbore Countersink End mill File Hand scraper Milling cutter Nibbler Reamer Shears Tipped tool Tool bit Forming tools Brake Die English wheel Hydraulic press Machine press Punch press Screw press Stamping press Hand tools Clamp Combination square Drift pin Hacksaw Hammer Hand scraper Machinist square Needlegun scaler Piercing saw Pliers Punch Scriber Tap and die Tongs Vise Workbench Wrench Machine tooling Angle plate Chuck Collet Fixture Indexing head Jig Lathe center Machine taper Magnetic base Mandrel Rotary table Wiggler Measuring instruments Bore gauge Caliper Center gauge Dial indicator Engineer's blue Engineer's spirit level Feeler gauge Gauge Gauge block Go/no go gauge Height gauge Machinist square Marking blue Marking gauge Marking out Micrometer Optical comparator Radius gauge Ruler Sine bar Straightedge Surface plate Tape measure Thread pitch gauge Vernier scale Smithing tools Anvil Forge Fuller Hardy tools Pritchel Steam hammer Swage block Trip hammer Casting Fabrication Forming Jewellery Machining Metallurgy Smithing Tools and terminology Welding v t e Sewing Techniques Basting Cut Darning Ease Embellishment Fabric tube turning Floating canvas Gather Godet Gusset Heirloom sewing Shirring Stitches List of sewing stitches Backstitch Bar tack Blanket Blind stitch Buttonhole Catch stitch Chain stitch Cross-stitch Embroidery stitch Hemstitch Lockstitch Overlock Pad stitch Pick stitch Rantering Running Sashiko Stoating Tack Topstitch Zigzag Seams Felled seam Seam allowance Style line Notions Trims Bias tape Collar stays Elastic Grommet / Eyelet Interfacing Passementerie Piping Ruffle Rickrack Self-fabric Soutache Trim Twill tape Wrights Closures Buckle Button Buttonhole Frog Hook-and-eye Hook and loop fastener Shank Snap Zipper Materials Bias Yarn / Thread Selvage Textiles / Fabrics Tools Bobbin Dress form Needle threader Pattern notcher Pin Pincushion Pinking shears Scissors Seam ripper Sewing needle Stitching awl Tailor's ham Tape measure Thimble Tracing paper Tracing wheel Trades Suppliers Cloth merchant Draper Dressmaker Haberdasher Mercer Sewing occupations Tailor Sewing machine manufacturers Barthélemy Thimonnier Bernina Brother Industries Elias Howe Feiyue Frister & Rossmann Janome Jones Sewing Machine Company Juki Merrow New Home Pfaff Sewmor Singer Tapemaster Viking / Husqvarna White Pattern Manufacturers Butterick Burda Clothkits McCall's Simplicity Glossary of sewing terms v t e Measuring and alignment tools architect's scale beam compass calipers chalk box combination square compass coordinate-measuring machine drafting machine engineer's scale flat spline French curve jig laser level laser line level laser measuring tool lesbian rule measuring rod micrometer plumb-bob protractor ruler set square sliding T bevel spirit level steel square stencil straightedge T-square tape measure theodolite vise weighing scale winding sticks yardstick Types of tools Cleaning Cutting and abrasive Forestry Garden Hand Machine and metalworking Measuring and alignment Power Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Tape_measure&oldid=693286111" Categories: Length, distance, or range measuring devices Metalworking measuring instruments Woodworking measuring instruments Sewing equipment Surveying Hidden categories: Articles needing additional references from May 2008 All articles needing additional references All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from October 2013 Commons category with local link same as on Wikidata Use dmy dates from May 2012 Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Article Talk Variants Views Read Edit View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Featured content Current events Random article Donate to Wikipedia Wikipedia store Interaction Help About Wikipedia Community portal Recent changes Contact page Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Cite this page Print/export Create a book Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Languages Afrikaans العربية Български བོད་ཡིག Català Čeština Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto Euskara Français Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Latina Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Polski Português Română Русский Ślůnski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links This page was last modified on 1 December 2015, at 16:20. Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view