Ruler - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Ruler From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to: navigation, search This article is about the measuring instrument. For other uses, see Ruler (disambiguation). "Carpenter's rule" redirects here. For the mathematical unfolding problem, see Carpenter's rule problem. A variety of rulers A 2-meter carpenter's rule Retractable flexible rule or tape measure A closeup of a steel rule A ruler, sometimes called a rule or line gauge, is an instrument used in geometry, technical drawing, printing, engineering and building to measure distances or to rule straight lines. The ruler is a straightedge which may also contain calibrated lines to measure distances.[1] Contents 1 Types 2 Ruler applications in geometry 3 History 4 Curved and flexible rulers 5 Philosophy 6 Sticking to the ruler's marks 7 See also 8 References 9 Bibliography 10 External links Types[edit] Gilded Bronze Ruler - 1 chi = 23.1 cm. Western Han (206 BCE - CE 8). Hanzhong City, China Bronze ruler. Han dynasty, 206 BCE to CE 220. Excavated in Zichang County, China A flexible ruler unstretched. A flexible ruler stretched. Rulers have long been made of different materials and in a wide range of sizes. Some are wooden. Plastics have also been used since they were invented; they can be molded with length markings instead of being scribed. Metal is used for more durable rulers for use in the workshop; sometimes a metal edge is embedded into a wooden desk ruler to preserve the edge when used for straight-line cutting. 12 inches or 30 cm in length is useful for a ruler to be kept on a desk to help in drawing. Shorter rulers are convenient for keeping in a pocket.[2] Longer rulers, e.g., 18 inches (45 cm) are necessary in some cases. Rigid wooden or plastic yardsticks, 1 yard long and meter sticks, 1 meter long, are also used. Classically, long measuring rods were used for larger projects, now superseded by tape measure or laser rangefinders. Desk rulers are used for three main purposes: to measure, to aid in drawing straight lines and as a straight guide for cutting and scoring with a blade. Practical rulers have distance markings along their edges. A line gauge is a type of ruler used in the printing industry. These may be made from a variety of materials, typically metal or clear plastic. Units of measurement on a basic line gauge usually include inches, agate, picas, and points. More detailed line gauges may contain sample widths of lines, samples of common type in several point sizes, etc. Measuring instruments similar in function to rulers are made portable by folding (carpenter's folding rule) or retracting into a coil (metal tape measure) when not in use. When extended for use they are straight, like a ruler. The illustrations on this page show a 2-meter carpenter's rule which folds down to a length of 24 cm to easily fit in a pocket, and a 5-meter-long tape which retracts into a small housing. A flexible length measuring instrument which is not necessarily straight in use is the tailor's fabric tape measure, a length of tape calibrated in inches and centimeters. It is used to measure around a solid body, e.g., a person's waist measurement, as well as linear measurement, e.g., inside leg. It is rolled up when not in use, taking up little space. A contraction rule is made having larger divisions than standard measures to allow for shrinkage of a metal casting. They may also be known as a 'shrinkage or shrink rule.[3] A ruler software program can be used to measure pixels on a computer screen or mobile phone. These programs are also known as screen rulers. Ruler applications in geometry[edit] Main article: Compass and straightedge In geometry, a ruler without any marks on it (a straightedge) may be used only for drawing straight lines between points. A straightedge is also used to help draw accurate graphs and tables. A ruler and compass construction refers to constructions using an unmarked ruler and a compass. It is possible to bisect an angle into two equal parts with ruler and compass. It can be proved, though, that it is impossible to divide an angle into three equal parts using only a compass and straightedge — the problem of angle trisection. However, should two marks be allowed on the ruler, the problem becomes solvable. History[edit] A wooden carpenter's rule and other tools found on board the 16th century carrack Mary Rose In the history of measurement many distance units have been used which were based on human body parts such as the cubit, hand and foot and these units varied in length by era and location.[4] In the late 18th century the metric system came into use and has been adopted to varying degrees in almost all countries in the world. Rulers made of Ivory were in use by the Indus Valley Civilization period prior to 1500 BC.[5] Excavations at Lothal (2400 BC) have yielded one such ruler calibrated to about 1⁄16 inch (1.6 millimetres).[5] Ian Whitelaw holds that the Mohenjo-Daro ruler is divided into units corresponding to 1.32 inches (33.5 millimetres) and these are marked out in decimal subdivisions with amazing accuracy, to within 0.005 inches (0.13 millimetres). Ancient bricks found throughout the region have dimensions that correspond to these units.[6] Anton Ullrich invented the folding ruler in 1851. Curved and flexible rulers[edit] The equivalent of a ruler for drawing or reproducing a smooth curve, where it takes the form of a rigid template, is known as a French curve. A flexible device which can be bent to the desired shape is known as a flat spline, or (in its more modern incarnation) a flexible curve. Historically, a flexible lead rule used by masons that could be bent to the curves of a molding was known as a lesbian rule.[7] Philosophy[edit] Ludwig Wittgenstein famously used rulers as an example in his discussion of language games in the Philosophical Investigations. He pointed out that the standard meter bar in Paris was the criterion against which all other rulers were determined to be one meter long, but that there was no analytical way to demonstrate that the standard meter bar itself was one meter long. It could only be asserted as one meter as part of a language game. Sticking to the ruler's marks[edit] When using a ruler use the smallest mark as the first estimated digit.[citation needed] For example, if a ruler's smallest mark is cm, and 4.5 cm is read, it is 4.5 (±0.1) or range 4.4 to 4.6 cm. The overall length of a ruler may not be accurate within the degree of the smallest mark[citation needed] and the marks may be imperfectly spaced within each unit. With both of these errors in mind, reading between the marks (to 4.55) does not increase one's confidence in the overall reading and may make it worse.[citation needed] See also[edit] science portal Accuracy and precision Dividing engine Golomb ruler Measuring rod Rolling ruler Scale rulers: architect's scale and engineer's scale Significant figures References[edit] ^ Dictionary.com definition ^ "Steel Rule Has Pocket Clip For Use As A Depth Gauge" Popular Science, December 1935 pg.887 bottom right ^ contraction rule Retrieved May 15, 2013 ^ Klein, Herbert A.. The science of measurement: a historical survey. Reprint, unabridged, corr. republ. der Ausg. New York, Simon & Schuster, 1974. ed. New York, NY: Dover, 1988. Print. ^ a b Whitelaw, p. 14. ^ Whitelaw, p. 15. ^ "lesbian, adj. and n.". Oxford English Dictionary (3rd ed.). Oxford University Press. September 2005.  (Subscription or UK public library membership required.) (subscription required) Bibliography[edit] Whitelaw, Ian (2007). A Measure of All Things: The Story of Man and Measurement. Macmillan. ISBN 0-312-37026-1. External links[edit] Simulator of use and reading of ruler or line gauge Look up ruler in Wiktionary, the free dictionary. Wikimedia Commons has media related to Length measuring devices. v t e Metalworking   Tools Cutting machines Bandsaw Cold saw Laser Miter saw Plasma Water jet cutter Cutting tools Broach Burr Chisel Counterbore Countersink End mill File Hand scraper Milling cutter Nibbler Reamer Shears Tipped tool Tool bit Forming tools Brake Die English wheel Hydraulic press Machine press Punch press Screw press Stamping press Hand tools Clamp Combination square Drift pin Hacksaw Hammer Hand scraper Machinist square Needlegun scaler Piercing saw Pliers Punch Scriber Tap and die Tongs Vise Workbench Wrench Machine tooling Angle plate Chuck Collet Fixture Indexing head Jig Lathe center Machine taper Magnetic base Mandrel Rotary table Wiggler Measuring instruments Bore gauge Caliper Center gauge Dial indicator Engineer's blue Engineer's spirit level Feeler gauge Gauge Gauge block Go/no go gauge Height gauge Machinist square Marking blue Marking gauge Marking out Micrometer Optical comparator Radius gauge Ruler Sine bar Straightedge Surface plate Tape measure Thread pitch gauge Vernier scale Smithing tools Anvil Forge Fuller Hardy tools Pritchel Steam hammer Swage block Trip hammer Casting Fabrication Forming Jewellery Machining Metallurgy Smithing Tools and terminology Welding v t e Measuring and alignment tools architect's scale beam compass calipers chalk box combination square compass coordinate-measuring machine drafting machine engineer's scale flat spline French curve jig laser level laser line level laser measuring tool lesbian rule measuring rod micrometer plumb-bob protractor ruler set square sliding T bevel spirit level steel square stencil straightedge T-square tape measure theodolite vise weighing scale winding sticks yardstick Types of tools Cleaning Cutting and abrasive Forestry Garden Hand Machine and metalworking Measuring and alignment Power Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ruler&oldid=716662899" Categories: Inventions of the Indus Valley Civilisation Length, distance, or range measuring devices Metalworking measuring instruments Stationery Stonemasonry tools Woodworking measuring instruments Hidden categories: Pages containing links to subscription-only content All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from December 2015 Commons category with local link different than on Wikidata Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Article Talk Variants Views Read Edit View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Featured content Current events Random article Donate to Wikipedia Wikipedia store Interaction Help About Wikipedia Community portal Recent changes Contact page Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Cite this page Print/export Create a book Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Languages العربية Azərbaycanca Беларуская Български Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Emiliàn e rumagnòl Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Gaeilge 한국어 Հայերեն Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Basa Jawa Lietuvių Magyar Македонски Bahasa Melayu Mìng-dĕ̤ng-ngṳ̄ Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål پښتو Plattdüütsch Polski Português Română Русский Scots Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Basa Sunda Suomi Svenska ไทย Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 粵語 中文 Edit links This page was last modified on 23 April 2016, at 01:29. Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view