Discrete geometry - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Discrete geometry From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to: navigation, search "Combinatorial geometry" redirects here. The term combinatorial geometry is also used in the theory of matroids to refer to a simple matroid, especially in older texts. A collection of circles and the corresponding unit disk graph Discrete geometry and combinatorial geometry are branches of geometry that study combinatorial properties and constructive methods of discrete geometric objects. Most questions in discrete geometry involve finite or discrete sets of basic geometric objects, such as points, lines, planes, circles, spheres, polygons, and so forth. The subject focuses on the combinatorial properties of these objects, such as how they intersect one another, or how they may be arranged to cover a larger object. Discrete geometry has large overlap with convex geometry and computational geometry, and is closely related to subjects such as finite geometry, combinatorial optimization, digital geometry, discrete differential geometry, geometric graph theory, toric geometry, and combinatorial topology. Contents 1 History 2 Topics in discrete geometry 2.1 Polyhedra and polytopes 2.2 Packings, coverings and tilings 2.3 Structural rigidity and flexibility 2.4 Incidence structures 2.5 Oriented matroids 2.6 Geometric graph theory 2.7 Simplicial complexes 2.8 Topological combinatorics 2.9 Lattices and discrete groups 2.10 Digital geometry 2.11 Discrete differential geometry 3 See also 4 Notes 5 References History[edit] Although polyhedra and tessellations had been studied for many years by people such as Kepler and Cauchy, modern discrete geometry has its origins in the late 19th century. Early topics studied were: the density of circle packings by Thue, projective configurations by Reye and Steinitz, the geometry of numbers by Minkowski, and map colourings by Tait, Heawood, and Hadwiger. László Fejes Tóth, H.S.M. Coxeter and Paul Erdős, laid the foundations of discrete geometry. [1][2][3] Topics in discrete geometry[edit] Polyhedra and polytopes[edit] Main articles: Polyhedron and Polytope A polytope is a geometric object with flat sides, which exists in any general number of dimensions. A polygon is a polytope in two dimensions, a polyhedron in three dimensions, and so on in higher dimensions (such as a 4-polytope in four dimensions). Some theories further generalize the idea to include such objects as unbounded polytopes (apeirotopes and tessellations), and abstract polytopes. The following are some of the aspects of polytopes studied in discrete geometry: Polyhedral combinatorics Lattice polytopes Ehrhart polynomials Pick's theorem Hirsch conjecture Packings, coverings and tilings[edit] Main articles: circle packing and tessellation Packings, coverings, and tilings are all ways of arranging uniform objects (typically circles, spheres, or tiles) in a regular way on a surface or manifold. A sphere packing is an arrangement of non-overlapping spheres within a containing space. The spheres considered are usually all of identical size, and the space is usually three-dimensional Euclidean space. However, sphere packing problems can be generalised to consider unequal spheres, n-dimensional Euclidean space (where the problem becomes circle packing in two dimensions, or hypersphere packing in higher dimensions) or to non-Euclidean spaces such as hyperbolic space. A tessellation of a flat surface is the tiling of a plane using one or more geometric shapes, called tiles, with no overlaps and no gaps. In mathematics, tessellations can be generalized to higher dimensions. Specific topics in this area include: Circle packings Sphere packings Kepler conjecture Quasicrystals Aperiodic tilings Periodic Graphs (Geometry) Finite subdivision rules Structural rigidity and flexibility[edit] Main article: Structural rigidity Graphs are drawn as rods connected by rotating hinges. The cycle graph C4 drawn as a square can be tilted over by the blue force into a parallelogram, so it is a flexible graph. K3, drawn as a triangle, cannot be altered by any force that is applied to it, so it is a rigid graph. Structural rigidity is a combinatorial theory for predicting the flexibility of ensembles formed by rigid bodies connected by flexible linkages or hinges. Topics in this area include: Cauchy's theorem Flexible polyhedra Incidence structures[edit] Main article: Incidence structure Seven points are elements of seven lines in the Fano plane, an example of an incidence structure. Incidence structures generalize planes (such as affine, projective, and Möbius planes) as can be seen from their axiomatic definitions. Incidence structures also generalize the higher-dimensional analogs and the finite structures are sometimes called finite geometries. Formally, an incidence structure is a triple where P is a set of "points", L is a set of "lines" and is the incidence relation. The elements of are called flags. If we say that point p "lies on" line . Topics in this area include: Configurations Line arrangements Hyperplane arrangements Buildings Oriented matroids[edit] Main article: Oriented matroid An oriented matroid is a mathematical structure that abstracts the properties of directed graphs and of arrangements of vectors in a vector space over an ordered field (particularly for partially ordered vector spaces).[4] In comparison, an ordinary (i.e., non-oriented) matroid abstracts the dependence properties that are common both to graphs, which are not necessarily directed, and to arrangements of vectors over fields, which are not necessarily ordered.[5] [6] Geometric graph theory[edit] Main article: Geometric graph theory A geometric graph is a graph in which the vertices or edges are associated with geometric objects. Examples include Euclidean graphs, the 1-skeleton of a polyhedron or polytope, intersection graphs, and visibility graphs. Topics in this area include: Graph drawing Polyhedral graphs Voronoi diagrams and Delaunay triangulations Simplicial complexes[edit] Main article: Simplicial complex A simplicial complex is a topological space of a certain kind, constructed by "gluing together" points, line segments, triangles, and their n-dimensional counterparts (see illustration). Simplicial complexes should not be confused with the more abstract notion of a simplicial set appearing in modern simplicial homotopy theory. The purely combinatorial counterpart to a simplicial complex is an abstract simplicial complex. Topological combinatorics[edit] Main article: Topological combinatorics The discipline of combinatorial topology used combinatorial concepts in topology and in the early 20th century this turned into the field of algebraic topology. In 1978 the situation was reversed – methods from algebraic topology were used to solve a problem in combinatorics – when László Lovász proved the Kneser conjecture, thus beginning the new study of topological combinatorics. Lovász's proof used the Borsuk-Ulam theorem and this theorem retains a prominent role in this new field. This theorem has many equivalent versions and analogs and has been used in the study of fair division problems. Topics in this are include: Sperner's lemma Regular maps Lattices and discrete groups[edit] Main articles: Lattice (discrete group) and discrete group A discrete group is a group G equipped with the discrete topology. With this topology, G becomes a topological group. A discrete subgroup of a topological group G is a subgroup H whose relative topology is the discrete one. For example, the integers, Z, form a discrete subgroup of the reals, R (with the standard metric topology), but the rational numbers, Q, do not. A lattice in a locally compact topological group is a discrete subgroup with the property that the quotient space has finite invariant measure. In the special case of subgroups of Rn, this amounts to the usual geometric notion of a lattice, and both the algebraic structure of lattices and the geometry of the totality of all lattices are relatively well understood. Deep results of Borel, Harish-Chandra, Mostow, Tamagawa, M. S. Raghunathan, Margulis, Zimmer obtained from the 1950s through the 1970s provided examples and generalized much of the theory to the setting of nilpotent Lie groups and semisimple algebraic groups over a local field. In the 1990s, Bass and Lubotzky initiated the study of tree lattices, which remains an active research area. Topics in this area include: Reflection groups Triangle groups Digital geometry[edit] Main article: Digital geometry Digital geometry deals with discrete sets (usually discrete point sets) considered to be digitized models or images of objects of the 2D or 3D Euclidean space. Simply put, digitizing is replacing an object by a discrete set of its points. The images we see on the TV screen, the raster display of a computer, or in newspapers are in fact digital images. Its main application areas are computer graphics and image analysis. See Li Chen, Digital and discrete geometry: Theory and Algorithms, Springer, 2014. (http://www.springer.com/us/book/9783319120980) Discrete differential geometry[edit] Main article: Discrete differential geometry Discrete differential geometry is the study of discrete counterparts of notions in differential geometry. Instead of smooth curves and surfaces, there are polygons, meshes, and simplicial complexes. It is used in the study of computer graphics and topological combinatorics. Topics in this area include: Discrete Laplace operator Discrete exterior calculus Discrete Morse theory Topological combinatorics Spectral shape analysis Abstract differential geometry Analysis on fractals See also[edit] Discrete and Computational Geometry Discrete mathematics Paul Erdős Notes[edit] ^ Pach, János; et al. (2008), Intuitive Geometry, in Memoriam László Fejes Tóth, Alfréd Rényi Institute of Mathematics  ^ Katona, G. O. H. (2005), "Laszlo Fejes Toth – Obituary", Studia Scientiarum Mathematicarum Hungarica 42 (2): 113  ^ Bárány, Imre (2010), "Discrete and convex geometry", in Horváth, János, A Panorama of Hungarian Mathematics in the Twentieth Century, I, New York: Springer, pp. 431–441, ISBN 9783540307211  ^ Rockafellar 1969. Björner et alia, Chapters 1-3. Bokowski, Chapter 1. Ziegler, Chapter 7. ^ Björner et alia, Chapters 1-3. Bokowski, Chapters 1-4. ^ Because matroids and oriented matroids are abstractions of other mathematical abstractions, nearly all the relevant books are written for mathematical scientists rather than for the general public. For learning about oriented matroids, a good preparation is to study the textbook on linear optimization by Nering and Tucker, which is infused with oriented-matroid ideas, and then to proceed to Ziegler's lectures on polytopes. References[edit] Bezdek, András, (2003). Discrete geometry: in honor of W. Kuperberg's 60th birthday. New York, N.Y: Marcel Dekker. ISBN 0-8247-0968-3.  CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list (link) Bezdek, Károly (2010). Classical Topics in Discrete Geometry. New York, N.Y: Springer. ISBN 978-1-4419-0599-4.  Bezdek, Károly (2013). Lectures on Sphere Arrangements - the Discrete Geometric Side. New York, N.Y: Springer. ISBN 978-1-4614-8117-1.  Bezdek, Károly; Deza, Antoine; Ye, Yinyu (2013). Discrete Geometry and Optimization. New York, N.Y: Springer. ISBN 978-3-319-00200-2.  Brass, Peter; Moser, William; Pach, János (2005). Research problems in discrete geometry. Berlin: Springer. ISBN 0-387-23815-8.  Pach, János; Agarwal, Pankaj K. (1995). Combinatorial geometry. New York: Wiley-Interscience. ISBN 0-471-58890-3.  Goodman, Jacob E. and O'Rourke, Joseph (2004). Handbook of Discrete and Computational Geometry, Second Edition. Boca Raton: Chapman & Hall/CRC. ISBN 1-58488-301-4.  CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list (link) Gruber, Peter M. (2007). Convex and Discrete Geometry. Berlin: Springer. ISBN 3-540-71132-5.  Matoušek, Jiří (2002). Lectures on discrete geometry. Berlin: Springer. ISBN 0-387-95374-4.  Vladimir Boltyanski, Horst Martini, Petru S. Soltan, (1997). Excursions into Combinatorial Geometry. Springer. ISBN 3-540-61341-2.  CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list (link) v t e Areas of mathematics outline topic lists Areas Algebra elementary linear multilinear abstract Arithmetic / Number theory Calculus / Analysis Category theory Combinatorics Computation Control theory Differential equations / Dynamical systems Functional analysis Game theory Geometry discrete algebraic differential finite Graph theory Information theory Lie theory Mathematics and art Mathematical logic Mathematical physics Mathematical statistics Numerical analysis Optimization Probability Representation theory Set theory Statistics Topology Trigonometry Divisions Pure Applied Discrete Computational Meta-   Category   Portal  Commons   WikiProject Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Discrete_geometry&oldid=702633660" Categories: Discrete geometry Hidden categories: CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Article Talk Variants Views Read Edit View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Featured content Current events Random article Donate to Wikipedia Wikipedia store Interaction Help About Wikipedia Community portal Recent changes Contact page Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Cite this page Print/export Create a book Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Languages العربية Bosanski Català Español Français Italiano Magyar Bahasa Melayu Русский Tagalog Edit links This page was last modified on 31 January 2016, at 20:01. Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view