Administrative divisions of Florida - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Administrative divisions of Florida From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia   (Redirected from City (Florida)) Jump to: navigation, search A map of Florida showing county names and boundaries Local governments are established by the government of Florida and are given varying amounts of non-exclusive authority over their jurisdictions. The law governing the creation of these governments is contained both within the Florida Constitution and Florida Statutes. Local governments are incorporated in Florida by special acts of the Florida Legislature. There are four types of local governments in Florida: counties, municipalities, school districts, and special districts.[1] In some cases, the municipal and county governments have merged into a consolidated government. However, smaller municipal governments can be created inside of a consolidated municipality/county. In Jacksonville, the municipal government has taken over the responsibilities normally given to the county government, Duval County, and smaller municipalities exist within it. Both counties and cities may have a legislative branch (commissions or councils) and executive branch (mayor or manager) and local police, but violations are brought before a county court. Counties and municipalities are authorized to pass laws (ordinances), levy taxes, and provide public services within their jurisdictions. All areas of Florida are located within a county, but only some areas have been incorporated into municipalities. All municipalities are located within a county and the county jurisdiction overlays the municipal jurisdiction. Usually, if there is a conflict between a county ordinance and a municipal ordinance, the municipal ordinance has precedence within the municipality's borders; however, the overlaying county's ordinances have precedence if the overlaying county has been designated a charter county by the Florida Legislature.[1] Counties and municipalities may create community development agencies which may take part of the money from taxes on increases in property values from their area of interest. They then use the money received in reinvestment (improvements) in the area.[2] Local government is not required to pay for health care insurance for government retirees. As of 2010, none do.[3] In 2011, researchers at Florida State University said that Florida's cities and counties have promised pensions they cannot afford. Pension obligations constituted 8% of total spending by local governments in 2009.[4] Counties[edit] See also: List of counties in Florida; Government of Miami-Dade County; and Government of Brevard County, Florida Florida consists of 67 counties, with most of Florida's counties named for local or national political leaders. Some are named for Spanish explorers or conquistadors, marking the influence of 200 years of Spanish rule. Natural features of the region, including rivers, lakes, and flora, are also commonly used for county names. Florida has counties named for participants on both sides of Second Seminole War: Miami-Dade County is partially named for Francis L. Dade, a Major in the U.S. Army at the time; Osceola County is named for a Native American resistance leader during the war. Each county has officers considered "state" officers, which are elected locally, their offices and salaries paid locally, but who can be removed or replaced by the governor, and not locally. These are the Sheriff, State Attorney, Public Defender, Tax Collector, County Clerk, a county Appraiser who established the value of real estate for tax purposes, and county judges. Each sheriff operates under Florida Statute 30.15.[5] By State Law there is one school district comprising each of the counties in Florida.[6] To provide liquidity to counties when tax bills are not paid, Florida operates under the tax lien sale process, whereby liens are sold for the amount of back taxes, interest, and costs. In Florida, bidders bid on the rate of interest (beginning at 18%) they will accept; the bidder offering the lowest rate is awarded the tax lien certificate. Once a lien has been outstanding for approximately 22 months (technically, April 1 of the second year following the year when the tax lien was originally offered for sale),[7] the tax lien holder may petition the circuit court (via the county tax collector) to begin the process for the tax deed sale of the property. Municipalities[edit] See also: List of cities in Florida and Government of Miami Municipalities in Florida may be called towns, cities, or villages, but there is no legal distinction between the different terms. Municipalities often have police departments, fire departments, and provide essential services such as water, waste collection, etc. In unincorporated areas of a county, the county itself provides these services. Municipalities may also enter agreements with the county to have the county provide certain services. Each county has a sheriff who also tends to have concurrent jurisdiction with municipal police departments.[1][8] References[edit] ^ a b c Dye, T.R., Jewett, A. & MacManus, S.A. (2007) Politics in Florida. Tallahassee: John Scott Dailey Florida Institute of Government. ^ [1] ^ Edmondson, Raymond (16 February 2011). "Stop the fear mongering". Florida Today (Melbourne, Florida). pp. 9A.  ^ "Fort Lauderdale: Study finds promised penions too costly". Florida Today (Melbourne, Florida). 11 February 2011. pp. 8B.  ^ Judicial Process Unit. Melbourne, Florida: Florida Today. 2011.  ^ "School Nurses". Merritt Island, Florida: Space Coast Medicine and Healthy Living. March–April 2009. pp. 21–33.  ^ Thus, a lienholder purchasing a lien at the sale in 2016 – sales are usually held in late May but cannot start later than June 1 – would have to wait until April 1, 2018, before taking action to foreclose. ^ Municipal codes and ordinances v t e Administrative divisions of the United States by first-level jurisdiction States Alabama Alaska Arizona Arkansas California Colorado Connecticut Delaware Florida Georgia Hawaii Idaho Illinois Indiana Iowa Kansas Kentucky Louisiana Maine Maryland Massachusetts Michigan Minnesota Mississippi Missouri Montana Nebraska Nevada New Hampshire New Jersey New Mexico New York North Carolina North Dakota Ohio Oklahoma Oregon Pennsylvania Rhode Island South Carolina South Dakota Tennessee Texas Utah Vermont Virginia Washington West Virginia Wisconsin Wyoming Federal district Washington, D.C. Insular areas American Samoa Guam Northern Mariana Islands Puerto Rico U.S. Virgin Islands v t e Local government in the United States States Alabama Alaska Arizona Arkansas California Colorado Connecticut Delaware Florida Georgia Hawaii Idaho Illinois Indiana Iowa Kansas Kentucky Louisiana Maine Maryland Massachusetts Michigan Minnesota Mississippi Missouri Montana Nebraska Nevada New Hampshire New Jersey New Mexico New York North Carolina North Dakota Ohio Oklahoma Oregon Pennsylvania Rhode Island South Carolina South Dakota Tennessee Texas Utah Vermont Virginia Washington West Virginia Wisconsin Wyoming Federal district Washington, D.C. Insular areas American Samoa Guam Northern Mariana Islands Puerto Rico U.S. Virgin Islands Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Administrative_divisions_of_Florida&oldid=717175352#Municipalities" Categories: Administrative divisions of the United States by state Local government in Florida Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Article Talk Variants Views Read Edit View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Featured content Current events Random article Donate to Wikipedia Wikipedia store Interaction Help About Wikipedia Community portal Recent changes Contact page Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Cite this page Print/export Create a book Download as PDF Printable version Languages Add links This page was last modified on 26 April 2016, at 04:58. Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view