Suffix - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Suffix From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to: navigation, search This article is about the linguistic term. For other uses, see Suffix (disambiguation). Affixes Prefix Suffix Circumfix Duplifix Infix Interfix Transfix Simulfix Suprafix Disfix In linguistics, a suffix (also sometimes termed postfix or ending) is an affix which is placed after the stem of a word. Common examples are case endings, which indicate the grammatical case of nouns or adjectives, and verb endings, which form the conjugation of verbs. Particularly in the study of Semitic languages, a suffix is called an afformative, as they can alter the form of the words. In Indo-European studies, a distinction is made between suffixes and endings (see Proto-Indo-European root). A word-final segment that is somewhere between a free morpheme and a bound morpheme is known as a suffixoid[1] or a semi-suffix[2] (e.g. English -like or German -freundlich 'friendly'). Suffixes can carry grammatical information (inflectional suffixes) or lexical information (derivational suffixes). An inflectional suffix is sometimes called a desinence.[3] Some examples in European languages: Girls, where the suffix -s marks the plural. He makes, where suffix -s marks the third person singular present tense. It closed, where the suffix -ed marks the past tense. De beaux jours, where the suffix -x marks the plural. Elle est passablement jolie, where the suffix -e marks the feminine form of the adjective. Many synthetic languages—Czech, German, Finnish, Latin, Hungarian, Russian, Turkish, etc.—use a large number of endings. Suffixes used in English frequently have Greek, French, or Latin origins. Inflection changes the grammatical properties of a word within its syntactic category. In the example: I was hoping the cloth wouldn't fade, but it has faded quite a bit. the suffix -ed inflects the root-word fade to indicate past tense. Inflectional suffixes do not change the word class of the word after inflection.[4] Inflectional suffixes in modern English include: -s third person singular present -ed past tense -t past tense -ing progressive/continuous -en past participle -s plural -en plural (irregular) -er comparative -est superlative -n't negative Derivational suffixes can be divided into two categories, namely class-changing derivation and class-maintaining derivation.[5] Derivational suffixes in modern English include: -ise/-ize (usually changes nouns into verbs) -fy (usually changes nouns into verbs) -ly (usually changes adjectives into adverbs) -ful (usually changes nouns into adjectives) -able/-ible (usually changes verbs into adjectives) -hood (usually class-maintaining, with the word class remaining a noun) -ess (usually class-maintaining, with the word class remaining a noun) -ness (usually changes adjectives into nouns) -less (usually changes nouns into adjectives) -ism (usually class-maintaining, with the word class remaining a noun) -ment (usually changes verbs into nouns) -ist (usually class-maintaining, with the word class remaining a noun) -al (usually changes nouns into adjectives) -ish (usually changes nouns into adjectives/ class-maintaining, with the word class remaining an adjective) -tion (usually changes verbs into noun) -logy/-ology (usually class-maintaining, with the word class remaining a noun) References[edit] ^ Kremer, Marion. 1997. Person reference and gender in translation: a contrastive investigation of English and German. Tübingen: Gunter Narr, p. 69, note 11. ^ Marchand, Hans. 1969. The categories and types of present-day English word-formation: A synchronic-diachronic approach. Munich: Beck, pp. 356 ff. ^ The Free Online Dictionary ^ Jackson and Amvela(2000): Word, Meaning and Vocabulary- An Introduction to Modern English Lexicology. London, Athenaeum Press, p.83 ^ Jackson and Amvela(2000): Word, Meaning and Vocabulary- An Introduction to Modern English Lexicology. London, Athenaeum Press, p.88 Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Suffix&oldid=713391527" Categories: Suffixes Affixes Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Article Talk Variants Views Read Edit View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Featured content Current events Random article Donate to Wikipedia Wikipedia store Interaction Help About Wikipedia Community portal Recent changes Contact page Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Cite this page Print/export Create a book Download as PDF Printable version Languages Afrikaans العربية Aragonés Avañe'ẽ Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца)‎ Български Bosanski Brezhoneg Català Cebuano Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Frysk Gàidhlig Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Ирон Íslenska Italiano Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Limburgs Македонски Malti Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål پنجابی Plattdüütsch Polski Português Runa Simi Русский Scots Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Українська Volapük Walon 粵語 中文 Edit links This page was last modified on 3 April 2016, at 19:34. Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view