Frithuswith - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Frithuswith From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to: navigation, search Saint Frithuswith Frithuswith hides amongst swine to escape from Algar. Stained-glass window in Christ Church, Oxford. Born c. 650 upper Thames region Died 727 Binsey, Oxford Venerated in Roman Catholic Church; Anglicanism; Eastern Orthodox Church; Oriental Orthodox Church Feast 19 October Attributes pastoral staff; a fountain; the ox Patronage Oxford, England; University of Oxford Frithuswith hiding with swine. From a stained glass in the Lady Chapel At Gloucester Cathedral. St Margaret's Well, Binsey, Oxfordshire. Saint Frithuswith[1] (c. 650 – 19 October 727; Old English: Friðuswīþ; also known as Frideswide, Frideswith, Fritheswithe, Frevisse, or simply Fris) was an English princess and abbess. She is credited with establishing a religious site later incorporated into Christ Church in Oxford — Frithuswith was the first abbess of this Oxford double monastery.[2] Frithuswith was the daughter of a Mercian sub-king named Dida of Eynsham, whose lands occupied western Oxfordshire and the upper reaches of the River Thames.[3] Dida is known to have endowed churches in Bampton and Oxford. Contents 1 Life 2 The priory 3 In modern tradition 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Life[edit] Two twelfth-century Latin texts (edited by John Blair)[4] were adapted into two Middle English accounts of the Life of Saint Frithuswith, which are included in the South English Legendary.[5] The accounts differ slightly in their story. The shorter tale recounts that Frithuswith was born to Didan (an Anglo-Saxon sub-king) and his wife Safrida around AD 650. With the help of her father, Frithuswith founded a priory (St Frideswide's Priory) while still young, but even though Fritheswith was bound to celibacy, Algar (that is, Æthelbald), a Mercian king, sought to marry her. When Frithuswith refused him, Algar tried to abduct her. A longer tale is attributed to Robert of Cricklade, then prior of Oxford, and was later recorded by William of Malmsbury.[2] According to this account (recorded in the South English Legendary), Fritheswith flees to Oxford. There she finds a ship sent by God which takes her to Bampton. Meanwhile the King searches for her in Oxford, but the people refuse to tell him where she is. When he has searched the whole town but cannot find her, he becomes blind.[6] In the shorter version, Frithuswith hides in a forest outside Oxford, but when Algar comes to look for her, she sneaks back into the town. The king follows her, but just outside the Oxford city gates he falls off his horse and breaks his neck.[7] In the longer life, the nuns in Binsey complain of having to fetch water from the distant River Thames, so Frideswide prays to God and a well springs up. The well water has healing properties and many people come to seek it out. This well can still be found today at the Church of St Margaret in Binsey, a few miles upriver from Oxford. Frithuswith remained abbess of the Oxford monastery until her death in about 727, where she was later buried. The priory[edit] Main article: Priory of St Frideswide, Oxford St Frideswide's Priory, a medieval Augustinian house (some of the buildings of which were incorporated into Christ Church, Oxford following the dissolution of the monasteries) is claimed to be the site of her abbey and relics. From early times the abbey appears to have been an important landowner in the area. However, it was destroyed in 1002 during the events of the St. Brice's Day massacre.[2] A shrine was kept at the abbey in Frithuswith's honour; later a monastery was built there for Augustinian canons. The authority on the subject, Dr. John Blair of Queen's College, Oxford, believes that Christ Church Cathedral is built on the site of her Saxon church. In 1180, the Archbishop of Canterbury translated Frithuswith's remains to a new shrine in the monastery church, an event that was attended by King Henry II of England. The later history of the monastery was chequered, and the shrine was repeatedly vandalised during the Dissolution of the Monasteries and beyond. In 1546 the monastery church became (and still remains) the cathedral church for the diocese of Oxford. Her shrine was reinstated by Queen Mary in 1558, but was later desecrated by James Calfhill, the Calvinist canon of the church, who was intent on suppressing her cult. As a result, Frithuswith's remains were mixed with those of Catherine Dammartin, wife of Peter Martyr Vermigli, and they remain so to this day.[2] In modern tradition[edit] Frithuswith is the patron saint of Oxford. She is also patron saint of Oxford University, which was declared by the Archbishop of Canterbury in 1440. Her feast day is 19 October, the traditional day of her death; the date of her translation is also commemorated on 12 February.[8] In art, she is depicted holding the pastoral staff of an abbess, a fountain springing up near her and an ox at her feet. The fountain probably represents the holy well at Binsey. She appears in medieval stained glass, and in Pre-Raphaelite stained glass by Edward Burne-Jones in Christ Church Cathedral, Oxford, in the chapel where her shrine is also located. Cambridge University also has a woman patron saint, St Etheldreda. See also[edit] Saints portal Priory of St Frideswide, Oxford St Frideswide's Church, Oxford Frideswide Square in central Oxford Frithuwold of Chertsey, a purported ancestor of Frithuswith List of Catholic saints References[edit] ^ John Blair, "Frithuswith (d. 727)", Oxford Dictionary of National Biography, Oxford University Press, 2004 accessed 5 January 2010 ^ a b c d Farmer, David Hugh (1997). The Oxford dictionary of saints (4th ed.). Oxford [u.a.]: Oxford Univ. Press. ISBN 9780192800589.  ^ Bentley, James (1993). A calendar of saints : the lives of the principal saints of the Christian Year. London: Little, Brown. ISBN 9780316908139.  ^ Oxoniensia 52 (1987): 71-127. ^ "The Legend of Frideswide of Oxford, an Anglo-Saxon Royal Abbess: Introduction." 2003. TEAMS Middle English Texts Series. Ed. Sherry L. Reames. 14 June 2010 [1] ^ "Longer South English Legendary Life of St. Frideswide." 2003. TEAMS Middle English Texts Series. Ed. Sherry L. Reames. 14 June 2010 [2] ^ "Shorter South English Legendary Life of St. Frideswide." 2003. TEAMS Middle English Texts Series. Ed. Sherry L. Reames. 14 June 2010 [3] ^  Herbermann, Charles, ed. (1913). "St. Frideswide". Catholic Encyclopedia. New York: Robert Appleton Company.  External links[edit] Frithuswith 1 at Prosopography of Anglo-Saxon England v t e Saints of Anglo-Saxon England British / Welsh Alban of St Albans Aldatus of Oxford Amphibalus of St Albans Arilda of Oldbury Barloc of Norbury Brannoc of Braunton Branwalator of Milton Credan of Bodmin Congar of Congresbury Dachuna of Bodmin Decuman of Watchet Elfin of Warrington Ivo of Ramsey Judoc of Winchester Juthwara of Sherbourne Melorius of Amesbury Nectan of Hartland Neot of St Neots Patrick of Glastonbury Rumon of Tavistock Samson of Dol Sativola of Exeter Urith of Chittlehampton East Anglian Æthelberht of East Anglia Æthelburh of Faremoutiers Æthelflæd of Ramsey Æthelthryth of Ely Æthelwine of Lindsey Athwulf of Thorney Blitha of Martham Botwulf of Thorney Cissa of Crowland Cuthbald of Peterborough Eadmund of East Anglia Eadnoth of Ramsey Guthlac of Crowland Herefrith of Thorney Hiurmine of Blythburgh Huna of Thorney Pega of Peakirk Regenhere of Northampton Seaxburh of Ely Tancred of Thorney Torthred of Thorney Tova of Thorney Walstan of Bawburgh Wihtburh of Ely Wulfric of Holme East Saxon Æthelburh of Barking Hildelith of Barking Osgyth Sæbbi of London Frisian, Frankish and Old Saxon Balthild of Romsey Bertha of Kent Felix of Dommoc Grimbald of St Bertin Monegunda of Watton Odwulf of Evesham Wulfram of Grantham Irish and Scottish Aidan of Lindisfarne Boisil of Melrose Echa of Crayke Ultan the Scribe Indract of Glastonbury Maildub of Malmesbury Kentish Æbbe of Thanet (Domne Eafe) Æthelberht of Kent Æthelburh of Kent Æthelred of Kent Albinus of Canterbury Berhtwald of Canterbury Deusdedit of Canterbury Edburga of Minster-in-Thanet Eanswith of Folkestone Eormengyth of Thanet Mildrith of Thanet Nothhelm of Canterbury Sigeburh of Thanet Mercian Ælfnoth of Stowe Ælfthryth of Crowland Æthelberht of Bedford Æthelmod of Leominster Æthelred of Mercia Æthelwynn of Sodbury Aldwyn of Coln Beonna of Breedon Beorhthelm of Stafford Coenwulf of Mercia Cotta of Breedon Credan of Evesham Cyneburh of Castor Cyneburh of Gloucester Cynehelm of Winchcombe Cyneswith of Peterborough Eadburh of Bicester Eadburh of Pershore Eadburh of Southwell Eadgyth of Aylesbury Eadweard of Maugersbury Ealdgyth of Stortford Earconwald of London Egwin of Evesham Freomund of Mercia Frithuric of Breedon Frithuswith of Oxford Frithuwold of Chertsey Hæmma of Leominster Merefin Mildburh of Wenlock Mildgyth Mildrith of Thanet Milred of Worcester Oda of Canterbury Oswald of Worcester Osburh of Coventry Rumwold of Buckingham Tibba of Ryhall Werburgh of Chester Wærstan Wigstan of Repton Wulfhild of Barking Northumbrian Acca of Hexham Æbbe "the Elder" of Coldingham Æbbe "the Younger" of Coldingham Ælfflæd of Whitby Ælfwald of Northumbria Æthelburh of Hackness Æthelgyth of Coldingham Æthelsige of Ripon Æthelwold of Farne Æthelwold of Lindisfarne Alchhild of Middleham Alchmund of Hexham Alchmund of Derby Balthere of Tyningham Beda of Jarrow Bega of Copeland Benedict Biscop Bercthun of Beverley Billfrith of Lindisfarne Bosa of York Botwine of Ripon Ceadda of Lichfield Cedd of Lichfield Ceolfrith of Monkwearmouth Ceolwulf of Northumbria Cuthbert of Durham Dryhthelm of Melrose Eadberht of Lindisfarne Eadfrith of Leominster Eadfrith of Lindisfarne Eadwine of Northumbria Ealdberht of Ripon Eanmund Eardwulf of Northumbria Eata of Hexham Ecgberht of Ripon Eoda Eosterwine of Monkwearmouth Hilda of Whitby Hyglac Iwig of Wilton John of Beverley Osana of Howden Osthryth of Bardney Oswald of Northumbria Oswine of Northumbria Sicgred of Ripon Sigfrith of Monkwearmouth Tatberht of Ripon Wihtberht of Ripon Wilfrith of Hexham Wilfrith II Wilgils of Ripon Roman Anselm of Canterbury Augustine of Canterbury Firmin of North Crawley Birinus of Dorchester Blaise Florentius of Peterborough Hadrian of Canterbury Honorius of Canterbury Justus of Canterbury Laurence of Canterbury Mellitus of Canterbury Paulinus of York Theodore of Canterbury South Saxon Cuthflæd of Lyminster Cuthmann of Steyning Leofwynn of Bishopstone West Saxon Æbbe of Abingdon Ælfgar of Selwood Ælfgifu of Exeter Ælfgifu of Shaftesbury Ælfheah of Canterbury Ælfheah of Winchester Æthelflæd of Romsey Æthelgar of Canterbury Æthelnoth of Canterbury Æthelwine of Athelney Æthelwold of Winchester Aldhelm of Sherborne Benignus of Glastonbury Beocca of Chertsey Beorhthelm of Shaftesbury Beornstan of Winchester Beornwald of Bampton Centwine of Wessex Cuthburh of Wimborn Cwenburh of Wimborne Dunstan of Canterbury Eadburh of Winchester Eadgar of England Eadgyth of Polesworth Eadgyth of Wilton Eadweard the Confessor Eadweard the Martyr Eadwold of Cerne Earmund of Stoke Fleming Edor of Chertsey Evorhilda Frithestan of Winchester Hædde of Winchester Humbert of Stokenham Hwita of Whitchurch Canonicorum Mærwynn of Romsey Margaret of Dunfermline Swithhun of Winchester Wulfsige of Sherborne Wulfthryth of Wilton Unclear origin Rumbold of Mechelen Authority control WorldCat Identities VIAF: 21701098 LCCN: no89021688 Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Frithuswith&oldid=703055874" Categories: 650 births 727 deaths Anglo-Saxon royalty West Saxon saints People from Oxford Christianity in Oxford Burials at Christ Church Cathedral, Oxford Anglo-Saxon abbesses 8th-century Christian saints Christian female saints of the Middle Ages 7th-century women 8th-century women Women of medieval England Hidden categories: Articles incorporating a citation from the 1913 Catholic Encyclopedia with Wikisource reference Articles containing Old English-language text Wikipedia articles with VIAF identifiers Wikipedia articles with LCCN identifiers Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Article Talk Variants Views Read Edit View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Featured content Current events Random article Donate to Wikipedia Wikipedia store Interaction Help About Wikipedia Community portal Recent changes Contact page Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Cite this page Print/export Create a book Download as PDF Printable version Languages Deutsch Italiano Edit links This page was last modified on 3 February 2016, at 06:10. Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view