Christ Church Cathedral, Oxford - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Christ Church Cathedral, Oxford From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to: navigation, search Christ Church Cathedral Cathedral Church of Christ Crossing tower and spire from the cloisters 51°45′00″N 1°15′17″W﻿ / ﻿51.75°N 1.254722°W﻿ / 51.75; -1.254722Coordinates: 51°45′00″N 1°15′17″W﻿ / ﻿51.75°N 1.254722°W﻿ / 51.75; -1.254722 Location Oxford, Oxfordshire Country England Denomination Church of England Website chch.ox.ac.uk/cathedral Architecture Style Romanesque, Gothic Years built 1160–1200 Administration Diocese Oxford (since 1546) Province Canterbury Clergy Dean Martyn Percy Subdean Edmund Newey Canon(s) George Pattison, Lady Margaret Professor of Divinity Nigel Biggar, Regius Professor of Moral and Pastoral Theology Sarah Foot, Regius Professor of Ecclesiastical History (Lay) Angela Tilby, Diocesan Canon Christ Church Cathedral is the cathedral of the diocese of Oxford, which consists of the counties of Oxford, Buckingham and Berks. It is also the chapel of Christ Church at the University of Oxford. This dual role as cathedral and college chapel is unique in the Church of England.[1] Contents 1 History 2 Dean and Chapter 3 Music 3.1 Organ 3.2 Organists 3.3 Choirs 4 Notable burials 5 Gallery 6 See also 7 References 8 External links History[edit] This section relies largely or entirely upon a single source. Relevant discussion may be found on the talk page. Please help improve this article by introducing citations to additional sources. (January 2015) The choir of Christ Church Cathedral, Oxford The choir, looking towards the organ and entrance The cathedral was originally the church of St Frideswide's Priory. The site is claimed to be the location of the abbey and relics of St Frideswide,[by whom?] the patron saint of Oxford, although this is debatable.[weasel words] In 1522, the priory was surrendered to Cardinal Wolsey, who had selected it as the site for his proposed college. However, in 1529 the foundation was taken over by King Henry VIII. Work stopped, but in June 1532 the college was refounded by the King. In 1546, Henry VIII transferred to it the recently created see of Oxford from Osney. The cathedral has the name of Ecclesia Christi Cathedralis Oxoniensis, given to it by King Henry VIII's foundation charter. There has been a choir at the cathedral since 1526, when John Taverner was the organist and also master of the choristers. The statutes of Cardinal Wolsey's original college, initially called Cardinal College, mentioned 16 choristers and 30 singing priests. Christ Church Cathedral has been said[by whom?] to be the smallest cathedral in England, and although it once was[when?], there are now smaller cathedrals, as several parish churches were elevated to cathedral status in the 20th century.[2] The nave, choir, main tower and transepts are late Norman. There are architectural features ranging from Norman to the Perpendicular style and a large rose window of the ten-part (ie botanical) type.[citation needed] Dean and Chapter[edit] Dean – Martyn Percy (since 4 October 2014 installation) Sub-Dean – Edmund Newey (since 3 August 2013 installation)[3] Regius Professor of Divinity (Canon Residentiary) - Graham Ward[4] Lady Margaret Professor of Divinity (Canon Residentiary) – Carol Harrison (since 27 April 2015 installation)[5] Regius Professor of Moral and Pastoral Theology (Canon Residentiary) – Nigel Biggar (since 6 October 2007 installation)[6] Regius Professor of Ecclesiastical History (Canon Residentiary) – Sarah Foot (since 6 October 2007 installation)[6] Continuing Ministerial Development Advisor (Diocesan Canon) – Angela Tilby (since November 2011) Music[edit] Organ[edit] The organ is a 43-rank, four-manual and pedal instrument built in 1979 by Austrian firm Rieger Orgelbau.[7] Organists[edit] See also: List of musicians at English cathedrals First among the notable organists of Christ Church Cathedral is the Renaissance composer John Taverner, who was appointed as the first organist by Cardinal Wolsey in 1526. Other organists (and directors of the choir) have included Basil Harwood, Thomas Armstrong, W. H. Harris, Simon Preston, Francis Grier and Nicholas Cleobury. The post of organist is currently held by Stephen Darlington. (As in many English cathedrals, the organist is also director of the choir and much of the organ playing is delegated to the assistant organist or sub-organist.) Choirs[edit] This section requires expansion. (March 2013) The main choir, the Christ Church Cathedral Choir, consists of 12 men (6 professional "lay-clerks" and 6 student "academical clerks") and 16 choristers (boys aged 7 – 13), and is directed by Stephen Darlington. They sing in university term time, at Christmas and Easter, and have an extensive touring and recording programme. Former choristers include the composer Sir William Walton. The Cathedral Singers consists of volunteers and is currently directed by John Padley. They are usually in residence outside of term time when the choristers and academical clerks of the main choir are on holiday. The college choir sings every 1–2 weeks in term time and is made up of current undergraduates and postgraduates from the college. Notable burials[edit] John Locke memorial engraving Robert Burton (author The Anatomy of Melancholy) George Berkeley, philosopher and Bishop of Cloyne (his memorial is in the nave) John Fell, Bishop of Oxford Henry Gage (1593–1645), buried in the Lucy Chapel off the south transept Henry Liddell, father of Alice Liddell John Locke, famous philosopher Lady Elizabeth Montacute John de Nowers George Stewart, 9th Seigneur d'Aubigny, Cavalier Thomas Strong, Bishop of Oxford John Underhill (bishop) John Urry Peter Wyche, ambassador to the Ottoman Empire and member of the Privy Council Gallery[edit] View of the cathedral The altar and vault Cloisters Ceiling Tomb of John de Nowers Stained glass window See also[edit] List of cathedrals in the United Kingdom Christ Church, Oxford: more information on the College and the Cathedral Christ Church Cathedral School Bishop of Oxford Diocese of Oxford Architecture of the medieval cathedrals of England English Gothic architecture Romanesque architecture Church of England References[edit] ^ "Cathedral | Christ Church, Oxford University". Chch.ox.ac.uk. Retrieved 2016-03-04.  ^ "Christ Church Cathedral - Miscellany". Web.archive.org. 2004-12-06. Archived from the original on 6 December 2004. Retrieved 2016-03-04.  ^ "News | Christ Church, Oxford University". Chch.ox.ac.uk. Retrieved 2016-03-04.  ^ http://web.archive.org/web/20131616022600/http://www.chch.ox.ac.uk/cathedral/whos-who/dean-chapter-staff. Archived from the original on 1 January 1970. Retrieved 22 October 2014.  Missing or empty |title= (help) ^ http://web.archive.org/web/20131715453100/http://www.anglicancommunion.org/acns/news.cfm/2004/1/19/ACNS3745. Archived from the original on 1 January 1970. Retrieved 10 March 2013.  Missing or empty |title= (help) ^ a b "News | Christ Church, Oxford University". Chch.ox.ac.uk. Retrieved 2016-03-04.  ^ "The National Pipe Organ Register (NPOR) V2.11". Npor.org.uk. Retrieved 2016-03-04.  External links[edit] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Christ Church Cathedral, Oxford. Christ Church Cathedral website Christ Church Cathedral Choir website Oxford Cathedral information A history of the choristers of Christ Church Cathedral, Oxford Sacred destinations photo gallery v t e Deans of Christ Church, Oxford Predecessors John Hygdon* John Oliver* John London** Richard Cox** Early modern Richard Cox Richard Marshall George Carew Thomas Sampson Thomas Godwin Thomas Cooper John Piers Tobias Matthew William James Thomas Ravis John King William Goodwin Richard Corbet Brian Duppa Samuel Fell Edward Reynolds John Owen Edward Reynolds George Morley John Fell John Massey Henry Aldrich Francis Atterbury George Smalridge Hugh Boulter William Bradshaw John Conybeare David Gregory William Markham Lewis Bagot Cyril Jackson Late modern Charles Hall Samuel Smith Thomas Gaisford Henry Liddell Francis Paget Thomas Strong Julian White Alwyn Williams John Lowe Cuthbert Simpson Henry Chadwick Eric Heaton John Drury Christopher Lewis Martyn Percy * – Academic deans only; prior to the establishment of Christ Church Cathedral; ** – Cathedral deans at Osney. v t e Cathedrals of the Church of England Province of Canterbury Birmingham Bristol Canterbury Chelmsford Chichester Coventry Derby Ely Exeter Gibraltar Gloucester Guildford Hereford Leicester Lichfield Lincoln London, St Paul's Norwich Oxford, Christ Church Peterborough Portsmouth Rochester St Albans St Edmundsbury Salisbury Southwark Truro Wells Winchester Worcester Province of York Blackburn Bradford Carlisle Chester Durham Liverpool Manchester Newcastle upon Tyne Peel Ripon Sheffield Southwell Wakefield York Authority control WorldCat Identities VIAF: 139592590 LCCN: n83129421 GND: 5097627-8 Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Christ_Church_Cathedral,_Oxford&oldid=718610650" Categories: Anglican cathedrals in England Chapels of the University of Oxford Christ Church, Oxford Church of England churches in Oxford English Gothic architecture in Oxfordshire Grade I listed buildings in Oxford Grade I listed cathedrals Grade I listed churches in Oxfordshire History of Oxford Norman architecture in England Towers in Oxford Visitor attractions in Oxford Burial sites of the Lyttelton family Hidden categories: Pages with citations lacking titles Pages with citations having bare URLs Use dmy dates from January 2015 Use British English from January 2015 Coordinates on Wikidata Articles needing additional references from January 2015 All articles needing additional references Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from January 2015 All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases Vague or ambiguous time from January 2015 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from January 2015 Articles to be expanded from March 2013 All articles to be expanded Articles using small message boxes Commons category with local link same as on Wikidata Wikipedia articles with VIAF identifiers Wikipedia articles with LCCN identifiers Wikipedia articles with GND identifiers Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Article Talk Variants Views Read Edit View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Featured content Current events Random article Donate to Wikipedia Wikipedia store Interaction Help About Wikipedia Community portal Recent changes Contact page Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Cite this page Print/export Create a book Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Languages Deutsch Español فارسی Français Gaeilge Italiano Nederlands پنجابی Polski Português Simple English Suomi Svenska ไทย 中文 Edit links This page was last modified on 4 May 2016, at 14:50. Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view