Awareness - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Awareness From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to: navigation, search "Aware" redirects here. For other uses, see Aware (disambiguation). This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (March 2009) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) Awareness is the ability to directly know and perceive, to feel, or to be conscious of events, objects, thoughts, emotions, or sensory patterns.[1] In this level of consciousness, sense data can be confirmed by an observer without necessarily implying understanding. More broadly, it is the state or quality of being aware of something. In biological psychology, awareness is defined as a human's or an animal's perception and cognitive reaction to a condition or event. Contents 1 Concept 2 Self-awareness 3 Neuroscience 3.1 Basic awareness 3.2 Basic interests 3.3 Changes in awareness 4 Living systems view 5 Communications and information systems 6 Covert awareness 7 Other uses 8 See also 9 References 10 External links Concept[edit] Awareness is a relative concept. Awareness may be focused on an internal state, such as a visceral feeling, or on external events by way of sensory perception. Awareness provides the raw material from which animals develop qualia, or subjective ideas about their experience. Insects have awareness that you are trying to swat them or chase after them. But insects do not have consciousness in the usual sense, because they lack the brain capacity for thought and understanding. Self-awareness[edit] Main article: Self-awareness Popular ideas about consciousness suggest the phenomenon describes a condition of being aware of one's awareness or, self-awareness.[2] Efforts to describe consciousness in neurological terms have focused on describing networks in the brain that develop awareness of the qualia developed by other networks.[3] Neuroscience[edit] Neural systems that regulate attention serve to attenuate awareness among complex animals whose central and peripheral nervous system provides more information than cognitive areas of the brain can assimilate. Within an attenuated system of awareness, a mind might be aware of much more than is being contemplated in a focused extended consciousness. Basic awareness[edit] Basic awareness of one's internal and external world depends on the brain stem. Bjorn Merker,[4] an independent neuroscientist in Stockholm, Sweden, argues that the brain stem supports an elementary form of conscious thought in infants with hydranencephaly. "Higher" forms of awareness including self-awareness require cortical contributions, but "primary consciousness" or "basic awareness" as an ability to integrate sensations from the environment with one's immediate goals and feelings in order to guide behavior, springs from the brain stem which human beings share with most of the vertebrates. Psychologist Carroll Izard emphasizes that this form of primary consciousness consists of the capacity to generate emotions and an awareness of one's surroundings, but not an ability to talk about what one has experienced. In the same way, people can become conscious of a feeling that they can't label or describe, a phenomenon that's especially common in pre-verbal infants. Due to this discovery medical definitions of brain death as a lack of cortical activity face a serious challenge.[citation needed] Basic interests[edit] Down the brain stem lie interconnected regions that regulate the direction of eye gaze and organize decisions about what to do next, such as reaching for a piece of food or pursuing a potential mate.[citation needed] Changes in awareness[edit] The ability to consciously detect an image when presented at near-threshold stimulus varies across presentations. One factor is "baseline shifts" due to top down attention that modulates ongoing brain activity in sensory cortex areas that affects the neural processing of subsequent perceptual judgments.[5] Such top down biasing can occur through two distinct processes: an attention driven baseline shift in the alpha waves, and a decision bias reflected in gamma waves.[6] Living systems view[edit] Outside of neuroscience biologists, Humberto Maturana and Francisco Varela contributed their Santiago theory of cognition in which they wrote: Living systems are cognitive systems, and living as a process is a process of cognition. This statement is valid for all organisms, with or without a nervous system.[7] This theory contributes a perspective that cognition is a process present at organic levels that we don't usually consider to be aware. Given the possible relationship between awareness and cognition, and consciousness, this theory contributes an interesting perspective in the philosophical and scientific dialogue of awareness and living systems theory. Communications and information systems[edit] In cooperative settings, awareness is a term used to denote “knowledge created through the interaction of an agent and its environment — in simple terms ‘knowing what is going on’”.[8] In this setting, awareness is meant to convey how individuals monitor and perceive the information surrounding their colleagues and the environment they are in. This information is incredibly useful and critical to the performance and success of collaborations.[9][10] Awareness can be further defined by breaking it down into a set of characteristics:[11] It is knowledge about the state of some environment Environments are continually changing, therefore awareness knowledge must be constantly maintained Individuals interact with the environment, and maintenance of awareness is accomplished through this interaction. It is generally part of some other activity – generally making it a secondary goal to the primary goal of the activity. Different categories of awareness have been suggested based on the type of information being obtained or maintained:[12] Informal awareness is the sense of who’s around and what are the up to. E.g. Information you might know from being collocated with an individual Social awareness is the information you maintain about a social or conversational context. This is a subtle awareness maintained through non-verbal cues, such as eye contact, facial express, etc. Group-structural awareness is the knowledge of others roles, responsibilities, status in a group. It is an understanding of group dynamics and the relationship another individual has to the group. Workspace awareness – this is a focus on the workspace’s influence and mediation of awareness information, particularly the location, activity, and changes of elements within the workspace. These categories are not mutually exclusive, as there can be significant overlap in what a particular type of awareness might be considered. Rather, these categories serve to help understand what knowledge might be conveyed by a particular type of awareness or how that knowledge might be conveyed. Workspace awareness is of particular interest to the CSCW community, due to the transition of workspaces from physical to virtual environments. While the type of awareness above refers to knowledge a person might need in a particular situation, context awareness and location awareness refer to information a computer system might need in a particular situation. These concepts of large importance especially for AAA (authentication, authorization, accounting) applications. The term of location awareness still is gaining momentum with the growth of ubiquitous computing. First defined with networked work positions (network location awareness), it has been extended to mobile phones and other mobile communicable entities. The term covers a common interest in whereabouts of remote entities, especially individuals and their cohesion in operation. The term of context awareness is a superset including the concept of location awareness. It extends the awareness to context features of an operational target as well as to context of an operational area. Covert awareness[edit] See also: Blindsight Covert awareness is the knowledge of something without knowing it. Some patients with specific brain damage are for example unable to tell if a pencil is horizontal or vertical.[citation needed] They are however able to grab the pencil, using the correct orientation of the hand and wrist. This condition implies that some of the knowledge the mind possesses is delivered through alternate channels than conscious intent.[original research?] Other uses[edit] Awareness forms a basic concept of the theory and practice of Gestalt therapy. In general, "awareness" may also refer to public or common knowledge or understanding about a social, scientific, or political issue, and hence many movements try to foster "awareness" of a given subject, that is, "raising awareness". Examples include AIDS awareness and Multicultural awareness. Awareness may refer to anesthesia awareness. See also[edit] Awareness ribbon Choiceless awareness Consciousness Feldenkrais method Indefinite monism Philosophy of mind Raising awareness Yoga Nidra Legal awareness References[edit] ^ http://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/awareness ^ http://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/self-awareness ^ Self-awareness: its nature and development. New York, NY: Guilford Press. 1998. pp. 12–13. ISBN 1-57230-317-4.  ^ Consciousness in the Raw, Science News Online, September 2007 ^ Sylvester CM, Shulman GL, Jack AI, Corbetta M (December 2007). "Asymmetry of anticipatory activity in visual cortex predicts the locus of attention and perception". J. Neurosci. 27 (52): 14424–33. doi:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3759-07.2007. PMID 18160650.  CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list (link) ^ Wyart, V.; Tallon-Baudry, C. (July 2009). "How Ongoing Fluctuations in Human Visual Cortex Predict Perceptual Awareness: Baseline Shift versus Decision Bias". Journal of Neuroscience 29 (27): 8715–8725. doi:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0962-09.2009. PMID 19587278.  ^ Capra, Fritjof (1996). The Web of Life: A New Scientific Understanding of Living Systems. Garden City, N.Y: Anchor Books. ISBN 0-385-47676-0.  ^ Gutwin, Carl; Greenberg, Saul (September 2002). "A Descriptive Framework of Workspace Awareness for Real-Time Groupware". Computer Supported Cooperative Work (CSCW) 11 (3-4): 411–446. doi:10.1023/A:1021271517844.  |access-date= requires |url= (help) ^ Dourish, Paul; Bellotti, Victoria (1992). "Awareness and Coordination in Shared Workspaces". Computer Supported Cooperative Work (November): 107–114. doi:10.1145/143457.143468.  |access-date= requires |url= (help) ^ Schmidt, Kjeld (2002). "The problem with 'awareness': Introductory remarks on 'awareness in CSCW'". Computer Supported Cooperative Work 11 (3-4): 285–298. doi:10.1023/A:1021272909573.  |access-date= requires |url= (help) ^ Gutwin, Carl; Greedberg, Saul (1999). A framework of awareness for small groups in sharedworkspace groupware (Technical Report 99-1 ed.). University of Saskatchewan, Canada: Department of Computer Science.  |access-date= requires |url= (help) ^ Greenberg, Saul; Gutwin, Carl; Cockburn, Andy (1996). "Awareness Through Fisheye Views in Relaxed-WYSIWIS Groupware". Proceedings of the conference on Graphics interface '96: 28–38.  |access-date= requires |url= (help) External links[edit] Look up awareness in Wiktionary, the free dictionary. Wikiquote has quotations related to: Awareness LaBar KS, Disterhoft JF (1998). "Conditioning, awareness, and the hippocampus". Hippocampus 8 (6): 620–6. doi:10.1002/(SICI)1098-1063(1998)8:6<620::AID-HIPO4>3.0.CO;2-6. PMID 9882019.  Cornell University: Recent findings in the awareness of brain damaged people. v t e Philosophy   Branches Traditional Metaphysics Epistemology Logic Ethics Aesthetics Philosophy of Action Art Culture Design Music Film Being Business Color Dialogue Education Environment Futility Happiness Healthcare History Human nature Humor Feminism Language Literature Mathematics Mind Pain Psychology Philosophy Religion Science Physics Chemistry Biology Geography Sexuality Social science Economics Justice Law Politics Society Space and time Sport Technology Artificial intelligence Computer science Engineering Information War   Schools of thought By era Ancient Western Medieval Renaissance Early modern Modern Contemporary Ancient Chinese Agriculturalism Confucianism Legalism Logicians Mohism Chinese naturalism Neotaoism Taoism Yangism Zen Greco-Roman Aristotelianism Atomism Cynicism Cyrenaics Eleatics Eretrian school Epicureanism Hermeneutics Ionian Ephesian Milesian Megarian school Neoplatonism Peripatetic Platonism Pluralism Presocratic Pyrrhonism Pythagoreanism Neopythagoreanism Sophism Stoicism Indian Buddhist Cārvāka Hindu Jain Persian Mazdakism Zoroastrianism Zurvanism Medieval European Christian philosophy Scholasticism Thomism Renaissance humanism East Asian Korean Confucianism Edo Neo-Confucianism Neo-Confucianism Indian Dvaita Navya-Nyāya Vishishtadvaita Islamic Averroism Avicennism Persian Illuminationism Ilm al-Kalam Sufi Jewish Judeo-Islamic Modern People Cartesianism Kantianism Neo-Kantianism Hegelianism Marxism Spinozism Ideal / Material Determinism Dualism Empiricism Idealism Absolute British German Objective Subjective Transcendental Classical realism Materialism Monism Naturalism Pragmatism Reductionism Rationalism Utilitarianism Other Anarchism Collectivism New Confucianism Conservatism Existentialism Foundationalism Historicism Holism Humanism Individualism Kokugaku Liberalism Modernism Natural Law Nihilism Phenomenology Positivism Neo-Scholasticism Social contract Socialism Transcendentalism Contemporary Analytic Applied ethics Analytic feminism Analytical Marxism Communitarianism Consequentialism Critical rationalism Experimental philosophy Falsificationism Foundationalism / Coherentism Generative linguistics Internalism and Externalism Logical positivism Legal positivism Normative ethics Meta-ethics Moral realism Neo-Aristotelian Quinean naturalism Ordinary language philosophy Postanalytic philosophy Quietism Rawlsian Reformed epistemology Systemics Scientism Scientific realism Scientific skepticism Contemporary utilitarianism Vienna Circle Wittgensteinian Continental Critical theory Deconstruction Existentialism Feminist Frankfurt School New Historicism Hermeneutics Neo-Marxism Phenomenology Postmodernism Post-structuralism Social constructionism Structuralism Western Marxism Other Kyoto School Objectivism Russian cosmism more...   Positions Aesthetics Formalism Institutionalism Aesthetic response Ethics Consequentialism Deontology Virtue Free will Compatibilism Determinism Libertarianism Metaphysics Atomism Dualism Monism Naturalism Epistemology Constructivism Empiricism Idealism Particularism Fideism Rationalism / Reasonism Skepticism Solipsism Mind Behaviorism Emergentism Eliminativism Epiphenomenalism Functionalism Objectivism Subjectivism Normativity Absolutism Particularism Relativism Nihilism Skepticism Universalism Ontology Action Event Process Reality Anti-realism Conceptualism Idealism Materialism Naturalism Nominalism Physicalism Realism   Philosophy by region Philosophy-related lists Miscellaneous By region African Ethiopian Aztec Native America Eastern Chinese Egyptian Czech Indian Indonesian Iranian Japanese Korean Vietnam Pakistani Western American Australian British Danish French German Greek Italian Polish Romanian Russian Slovene Turkish Lists Outline Index Years Problems Schools Glossary Philosophers Movements Publications Miscellaneous Women in philosophy Sage (philosophy) Portal Category WikiProject Changes v t e Metaphysics Metaphysicians Parmenides Plato Aristotle Plotinus Duns Scotus Thomas Aquinas Francisco Suárez Nicolas Malebranche René Descartes John Locke David Hume Thomas Reid Immanuel Kant Isaac Newton Arthur Schopenhauer Baruch Spinoza Georg W. F. Hegel George Berkeley Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz Henri Bergson Friedrich Nietzsche Charles Sanders Peirce Joseph Maréchal Ludwig Wittgenstein Martin Heidegger Alfred N. Whitehead Bertrand Russell Dorothy Emmet G. E. Moore Jean-Paul Sartre Gilbert Ryle Hilary Putnam P. F. Strawson R. G. Collingwood Adolph Stöhr Rudolf Carnap Saul Kripke Willard V. O. Quine G. E. M. Anscombe Donald Davidson Michael Dummett David Malet Armstrong David Lewis Alvin Plantinga Peter van Inwagen Derek Parfit more ... Theories Abstract object theory Action theory Anti-realism Determinism Dualism Enactivism Essentialism Existentialism Free will Idealism Libertarianism Liberty Materialism Meaning of life Monism Naturalism Nihilism Phenomenalism Realism Physicalism Pirsig's metaphysics of Quality Platonic idealism Relativism Scientific realism Solipsism Subjectivism Substance theory Type theory Concepts Abstract object Anima mundi Being Category of being Causality Choice Cogito ergo sum Concept Embodied cognition Entity Essence Existence Experience Hypostatic abstraction Idea Identity Identity and change Information Insight Intelligence Intention Linguistic modality Matter Meaning Memetics Mental representation Mind Motion Necessity Notion Object Pattern Perception Physical body Principle Property Qualia Quality Reality Soul Subject Substantial form Thought Time Truth Type–token distinction Universal Unobservable Value more ... Related topics Axiology Cosmology Epistemology Feminist metaphysics Interpretations of quantum mechanics Meta- Ontology Philosophy of mind Philosophy of psychology Philosophy of self Philosophy of space and time Teleology Theoretical physics Category Portal WikiProject v t e Mental processes Cognition Awareness Cognitive dissonance Comprehension Consciousness Imagination Intuition Perception Amodal Haptic (touch) Sound pitch harmonics speech Social Perception as interpretation Visual Color RGB model Peripheral Depth Form Memory Encoding Storage Recall Consolidation Other Attention Higher nervous activity Intention Learning Mental fatigue Mental set Thinking Volition Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Awareness&oldid=716630870" Categories: Cognition Consciousness Mental processes Systems psychology Unsolved problems in neuroscience Mindfulness (psychology) Hidden categories: CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list Pages using citations with accessdate and no URL Articles needing additional references from March 2009 All articles needing additional references All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from July 2014 Articles with unsourced statements from April 2013 All articles that may contain original research Articles that may contain original research from August 2009 Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Article Talk Variants Views Read Edit View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Featured content Current events Random article Donate to Wikipedia Wikipedia store Interaction Help About Wikipedia Community portal Recent changes Contact page Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Cite this page Print/export Create a book Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Languages العربية Deutsch Español فارسی Italiano עברית 日本語 Norsk bokmål Русский کوردیی ناوەندی Suomi Svenska தமிழ் Edit links This page was last modified on 22 April 2016, at 21:06. Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view