Flag of the Czech Republic - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Flag of the Czech Republic From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to: navigation, search "Flag of Czechoslovakia" redirects here. For the flag of Slovakia, see Flag of Slovakia. Czech Republic Use National flag, civil and state ensign Proportion 2:3 Adopted 1 January 1993 30 March 1920 Design Two equal horizontal bands of white (top) and red with a blue isosceles triangle based on the hoist side. Designed by Jaroslav Kursa The national flag of the Czech Republic (Czech: státní vlajka České republiky) is the same as the flag of the former Czechoslovakia. Upon the dissolution of Czechoslovakia, the Czech Republic kept the Czechoslovak flag while the Slovak Republic adopted its own flag. The first flag of Czechoslovakia was based on the coat of arms of Bohemia, and was white over red. This was identical to the Flag of Poland, so a blue triangle was added at the hoist in 1920. The flag was banned by the Nazis in 1939, and a horizontal tricolor of white, red, and blue was enforced. The 1920 flag was restored in 1945. Contents 1 History 2 Dimensions 3 Presidential standard 3.1 Previous versions 4 Literature 5 References 6 External links History[edit] Flag of Kingdom of Bohemia, and Czechoslovakia. (1918–1920) Flag of Czechoslovakia (1920–1992) Flag of the Protectorate of Bohemia and Moravia. (1939-1945) Naval Ensign of Czechoslovakia. (1935-1955) Naval Ensign of Czechoslovakia. (1955-1960) Flag of Federal Czech Socialist Republic (1990-1992) After the establishment of an independent Czechoslovakia in 1918, the country had been using the red and white flag of Bohemia, identical to the Polish flag. Following calls for a new flag to be adopted by the fledgling state, a committee picked a design by Jaroslav Kursa, an archivist in the Czechoslovak Ministry of the Interior.[1] His design included the red and white horizontal stripes derived from the coat of arms of Bohemia, and added a blue wedge extended halfway along the flag. The flag was officially approved by the National Assembly of Czechoslovakia on 30 March 1920 and since then, it has been in continuous use, with the exception of the German occupation of Czechoslovakia during World War II,[2] Additionally, during a short period following the Velvet Revolution between 1990 and 1992, the Czech part of the Czechoslovak federated state adopted the previous red and white flag.[citation needed] During the 1992 negotiations on the split of Czechoslovakia, a clause forbidding the use of the state symbols of Czechoslovakia by either successor state was inserted into the legislation concerning the dissolution of the federation.[3] The Czech Republic violated this clause, passing legislation overruling the previous agreement and keeping the use of the flag.[citation needed] Dimensions[edit] geometry vertical hoisting The blazon of this flag is per pall fesswise Argent, Azure, and Gules. The flag is formed from an isosceles triangle that extends halfway along the rectangle (a common mistake is to draw it shorter) and two bands: one white and one red. Czech Republic tricolour Presidential standard[edit] Standard of the President Proportion 1:1 Adopted 1993 (1918) Design Coat of arms with national motto "Pravda vítězí" (Truth prevails) and leaves of linden tree. Designed by Jiří Louda[4] Another Czech official symbol is the Standard of the President of the Czech Republic. It was first introduced in 1918 for the President of Czechoslovakia. The current version, which was designed by heraldist Jiří Louda,[4] was adopted upon the creation of an independent Czech Republic in 1993. Previous versions[edit] Presidential standard of First Czechoslovak Republic (1918-1939), and Czechoslovak Republic (1945-1960). Presidential standard of Protectorate of Bohemia and Moravia (1939-1945). Presidential standard of Czechoslovak Socialist Republic (1960-1990). Presidential standard of Czech and Slovak Federal Republic (1990-1992). Literature[edit] Zbyšek Svoboda, Pavel Fojtík: brochure Naše vlajka. Vznik a vývoj české vlajky (Our Flag. Origin and evolution of the Czech flag), Libea, 2005, ISBN 80-239-5862-3. Petr Exner, Pavel Fojtík, Zbyšek Svoboda: brochure Vlajky, prapory a jejich používání (Flags, banners and their use), Libea, 2004, ISBN 80-239-2873-2. References[edit] ^ "Czech society of vexicologists on the origin of the Czechoslovak state flag" (MS Word) (in Czech). Retrieved 2007-12-10.  ^ Government of the Czech Republic The Czech Republic's national flag. Retrieved March 4, 2011. ^ Ústavný zákon č. 542/1992 Zb. o zániku Českej a Slovenskej Federatívnej Republiky, Čl. 3 ods. 2 (Constitutional act. No. 542/1992 Col. on the dissolution of the Czech and Slovak Federative Republic, art. 3 sect. 2) ^ a b "Zomrel heraldik Jiří Louda, autor českého štátneho znaku a prezidentskej zástavy". Aktuality.sk. 2015-09-02. Retrieved 2015-09-28.  External links[edit] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Flags of the Czech Republic. History of the Czech and Czechoslovak flag (Czech) Czech Republic at Flags of the World The law defining state symbols of the Czech Republic (Czech) v t e Czech Republic articles History Unetice culture Boii Marcomanni Samo Great Moravia Přemyslid dynasty Lands of the Bohemian Crown Czech lands (1526–1648) 1648–1867 1867–1918 Czechoslovakia Czech Republic Geography Czech lands Protected areas Regions Rivers Urban planning Politics Administrative divisions Constitution Elections Foreign relations Government Judiciary Law enforcement Legal system LGBT history Military Parliament Political parties Economy Energy Koruna (currency) Oil and gas deposits Stock Exchange Tourism Transport Society Crime Demographics Education Healthcare Religion Culture Art Coat of arms Cuisine Czech language Flag Literature Music Panelák (architectural style) Philosophy Public holidays Sport Television Outline Index Category Portal WikiProject v t e Flags of Europe Sovereign states Albania Andorra Armenia Austria Azerbaijan Belarus Belgium Bosnia and Herzegovina Bulgaria Croatia Cyprus Czech Republic Denmark Estonia Finland France Georgia Germany Greece Hungary Iceland Ireland Italy Kazakhstan Latvia Liechtenstein Lithuania Luxembourg Macedonia Malta Moldova Monaco Montenegro Netherlands Norway Poland Portugal Romania Russia San Marino Serbia Slovakia Slovenia Spain Sweden Switzerland Turkey Ukraine United Kingdom England Northern Ireland Scotland Wales Vatican City States with limited recognition Abkhazia Kosovo Nagorno-Karabakh Republic Northern Cyprus South Ossetia Transnistria Dependencies and other territories Åland Faroe Islands Gibraltar Guernsey Jersey Isle of Man Svalbard Other entities European Union Sovereign Military Order of Malta Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Flag_of_the_Czech_Republic&oldid=718483178" Categories: National flags Flags of the Czech Republic National symbols of the Czech Republic Hidden categories: CS1 Czech-language sources (cs) Use dmy dates from January 2015 Articles containing Czech-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from July 2015 Commons category with local link same as on Wikidata Articles with Czech-language external links Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Article Talk Variants Views Read Edit View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Featured content Current events Random article Donate to Wikipedia Wikipedia store Interaction Help About Wikipedia Community portal Recent changes Contact page Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Cite this page Print/export Create a book Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Languages አማርኛ العربية Azərbaycanca Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца)‎ Български Bosanski Català Чӑвашла Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego ગુજરાતી 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski বিষ্ণুপ্রিয়া মণিপুরী Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית Basa Jawa ქართული Қазақша Latviešu Lietuvių Magyar Македонски मराठी Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Română Romani Русский Sámegiella Scots Shqip Slovenčina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska ไทย Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt Yorùbá 中文 Edit links This page was last modified on 3 May 2016, at 19:40. Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view