Flag of Slovakia - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Flag of Slovakia From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to: navigation, search "Slovakia tricolor" redirects here. It is not to be confused with Slovene tricolor. Slovakia Use National flag Proportion 2:3 Adopted September 3, 1992 Design A horizontal tricolour of white, blue and red; charged with a shield containing a white cross is placed to left of centre When flown vertically the coat of arms is rotated. This is the reverse side. The current form of the flag of Slovakia was adopted by Slovakia's Constitution, which came into force on 3 September 1992. The flag, in common with other Slavic nations, uses the colours white, blue and red. Contents 1 History 2 Design 3 Flags Similar to the Flag of Slovakia 4 Flags 4.1 Historical flags 4.2 Presidential standard 4.3 Other flags 4.4 Similar flags 5 See also 6 References 7 External links History[edit] Slovakia's flag in its current form (but with another coat of arms on it or without any arms) can be dated back to the revolutionary year 1848[citation needed] (see: The Revolutions of 1848 in the Habsburg areas). It was also used semi-officially in Czechoslovakia before World War II, by the Slovak Republic during WWII, and finally adopted (without the coat of arms) on 1 March 1990 as the flag of the Slovak Republic within Czechoslovakia. The coat of arms was added on 3 September 1992 and a special law describing the details of the flag followed in February 1993. Design[edit] The blue triangle in the current flag of the Czech Republic, with which Slovakia formed Czechoslovakia up to the dissolution of Czechoslovakia, was taken over from the blue strip of Slovakia's flag in 1920 into the flag of Czechoslovakia. The flag of Czechoslovakia was taken over by the Czech Republic in late 1992 in direct violation of the 1992 Act on the Division of Czechoslovakia explicitly forbidding state symbols to be used by the two successor states.[1] Since the Slovak flag without the coat of arms is identical to that of the modern flag of the Russian Federation and it can also be compared to the modern flag of Slovenia, the Constitution of Slovakia added the national coat of arms in September 1992. Flags Similar to the Flag of Slovakia[edit] The Flag of Slovakia also looks like the flags of Russia and Slovenia, which both use Pan-Slavic colors (red blue and white,) (Pan-Slavism in Czech lands and Slovakia) with Slovenia also having a similar coat of arms on the flag. Flags[edit] Historical flags[edit] Flag of the Slovak Soviet Republic Unofficial flag of Slovakia before 1938. Official flag of the autonomous Slovak land within the Second Czechoslovak Republic (1938–1939), WWII Slovak Republic (1939–1945) and Slovak Republic within Czechoslovakia (1990–1992) Flag of Czechoslovakia (1920–1992) War Ensign of the Slovak Republic (1939–1945) Presidential standard[edit] Standard of the President (1939–1945) Standard of the President (1993–present) Other flags[edit] Vertical variant of the flag of Slovakia Construction sheet Similar flags[edit] Flag of Russia Flag ratio: 2:3 Flag of Slovenia Flag ratio: 1:2 See also[edit] Coat of arms of Slovakia Pan-Slavic colors References[edit] ^ Ústavný zákon č. 542/1992 Zb. o zániku Českej a Slovenskej Federatívnej Republiky, Čl. 3 ods. 2 (Constitutional act. No. 542/1992 Col. on the dissolution of the Czech and Slovak Federative Republic, art. 3 sect. 2) External links[edit] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Flags of Slovakia Slovakia Flag Zákon NR SR o štátnych symboloch Slovenskej republiky a ich používaní v t e Slovakia articles History List of rulers Pannonia Marcomannia Slavs Samo Great Moravia Nitra Balaton High Medieval Kingdom of Hungary Late Medieval Kingdom of Hungary Matthew III Csák Amadeus Aba Ottoman era Transylvania Royal Hungary Upper Hungary Imre Thököly Slovak Uprising Czechoslovakia Slovaks in Czechoslovakia (1918–38) Slovak Soviet Republic (1919) Slovak Republic (1939–45) National Uprising Slovaks in Czechoslovakia (1960–90) Slovak Socialist Republic (1969–92) Dissolution 1997 referendum Language law Geography Carpathians Cities and towns Districts Islands Municipalities National parks Protected areas Regions Rivers Tourism regions Traditional regions Wildlife World Heritage Sites Politics Constitution Elections Foreign relations Government Human rights LGBT Law enforcement Military National Council (parliament) Political parties Economy Central bank Energy Euro (currency) Privatisation Stock exchange "Tatra Tiger" Telecommunications Tourism Transport Society Crime Demographics Slovaks list Hungarians Education Language Public holidays Remembrance days Culture Anthem Cinema Coat of arms Cuisine Flag Literature Music Newspapers Religion Shepherd's axe Sport Radio Television Outline Book Category Portal WikiProject v t e Flags of Europe Sovereign states Albania Andorra Armenia Austria Azerbaijan Belarus Belgium Bosnia and Herzegovina Bulgaria Croatia Cyprus Czech Republic Denmark Estonia Finland France Georgia Germany Greece Hungary Iceland Ireland Italy Kazakhstan Latvia Liechtenstein Lithuania Luxembourg Macedonia Malta Moldova Monaco Montenegro Netherlands Norway Poland Portugal Romania Russia San Marino Serbia Slovakia Slovenia Spain Sweden Switzerland Turkey Ukraine United Kingdom England Northern Ireland Scotland Wales Vatican City States with limited recognition Abkhazia Kosovo Nagorno-Karabakh Republic Northern Cyprus South Ossetia Transnistria Dependencies and other territories Åland Faroe Islands Gibraltar Guernsey Jersey Isle of Man Svalbard Other entities European Union Sovereign Military Order of Malta v t e National flags and coats of arms National flags Sovereign states Dependent territories Timeline National coats of arms Sovereign states Dependent territories Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Flag_of_Slovakia&oldid=696840508" Categories: 1992 introductions National symbols of Slovakia National flags Hidden categories: All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from December 2008 Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Article Talk Variants Views Read Edit View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Featured content Current events Random article Donate to Wikipedia Wikipedia store Interaction Help About Wikipedia Community portal Recent changes Contact page Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Cite this page Print/export Create a book Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Languages العربية Azərbaycanca Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца)‎ Български Bosanski Català Чӑвашла Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski বিষ্ণুপ্রিয়া মণিপুরী Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ქართული Lietuvių Magyar Македонски मराठी Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Română Русский Scots Shqip Slovenčina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska ไทย Türkçe Українська Yorùbá 中文 Edit links This page was last modified on 26 December 2015, at 08:42. Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view