Talk:Flag of Slovenia - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Talk:Flag of Slovenia From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to: navigation, search WikiProject Heraldry and vexillology (Rated Start-class) Heraldry and vexillologyWikipedia:WikiProject Heraldry and vexillologyTemplate:WikiProject Heraldry and vexillologyheraldry and vexillology articles Heraldry portal v t e Flag of Slovenia is within the scope of the Heraldry and vexillology WikiProject, a collaborative effort to improve Wikipedia's coverage of heraldry and vexillology. If you would like to participate, you can visit the project page, where you can join the project and see a list of open tasks.  Start  This article has been rated as Start-Class on the project's quality scale.   WikiProject Slovenia (Rated Start-class, High-importance) SloveniaWikipedia:WikiProject SloveniaTemplate:WikiProject SloveniaSlovenia articles Slovenia portal v t e This article is within the scope of WikiProject Slovenia, a collaborative effort to improve the coverage of Slovenia on Wikipedia. If you would like to participate, please visit the project page, where you can join the discussion and see a list of open tasks.  Start  This article has been rated as Start-Class on the project's quality scale.  High  This article has been rated as High-importance on the project's importance scale.   WikiProject Slovenia to-do list: edit history watch purge Here are some tasks you can do (watch): Requests: (Missing article directory) Valentin Stanič (sl), Geology of Slovenia, Hermagoras Society (sl) Wikify: Beer in Slovenia, Billysi, Kurentovanje Unreferenced: Culture of Slovenia, Brotherhood and Unity Highway, Predjama Castle Cleanup: Education in Slovenia, Inex-Adria Aviopromet Flight 1308, Transport in Slovenia Expand: Rudolf Maister, Music of Slovenia, Orders and decorations of Slovenia Stubs: Ajdovi žganci, Beer in Slovenia, Čop Street, Emnilda, Radenska Update: Avče Pumped Storage Plant, Congress Square, Politics of Slovenia NPOV: Archaeological Society of Slovenia, Rally of Truth, Lojze Grozde Portal maintenance: Update announcements, and suggest Selected articles and pictures Help assess the quality of 200 unassessed articles Take/Add requested photographs Add geocoordinate data to Slovenia articles using geolocator. Contents 1 Eleven striped proposal 2 Source 3 Flag of Kingdom of Yugoslavia 4 The colors of Carniola?? 5 Slovenian naval jack 6 Presidential flag - Border color order 7 Slovakian tricolor Eleven striped proposal[edit] What happened to the eleven striped proposal mentioned? It was here. It still says "the eleven-striped proposal to the right" even though it isn't. --Rmpfu89 I was going to ask that, too... AnonMoos 08:00, 12 November 2006 (UTC) Has been deleted meanwhile, I'm afraid... I've corrected the article. —Nightstallion (?) 21:15, 27 November 2006 (UTC) Source[edit] As for the colors: "*Source: Government Communication Office" That link is broken. So there is no source. --- —Preceding unsigned comment added by 81.17.207.92 (talk) 06:32, 15 October 2010 (UTC) Flag of Kingdom of Yugoslavia[edit] The flag is related to the slovene nation, as Slovenia is a official successor to SFRY and SFRY is the official successor of Kingdom of Yugoslavia. Slovenes were also one of the founders of the Yugoslavia, along with Croats and Serbs, so yes, the Flag of the kingdom of Yugoslavia is a de jure flag of Slovenia, like it or not. I do not see the problem at adding the Kingdom flag on this article, Viator Slovenicus. Mrwho00tm (talk) 21:11, 29 November 2010 (UTC) I perfectly agree with you, but this is an article on the flag of Slovenia, not about the flags of the states to which Slovenia has historically belonged. It is also not true when you say that the flag of the Kingdom of Yugoslavia was the de jure flag of Slovenia: Slovenia did not exist as a recognized administrative or political entity under the KY, so it could not have a de jure flag. Viator slovenicus (talk) 01:10, 1 December 2010 (UTC) So, even if a nation was the founder of the state, in this case Kingdom of Slovenes, Croats and Serbs, and they have one flag, it should not be recognised as the (former) flag of Slovenia, Croatia or Serbia? In that case, I might have to clean up some other articles. oh, and by the way do we need to speak English on this disscusion page, because we both speak slovene, don't we? =)Mrwho00tm (talk) 14:33, 1 December 2010 (UTC) Yes: it's technically not the former flag of Slovenia, Croatia and Serbia, but the flag of another entity, namely Yugoslavia. I think it should be discussed there. If we communicate in Slovene, other people won't be able to follow: that's also the wp policy. Best, Viator slovenicus (talk) 21:12, 1 December 2010 (UTC) The colors of Carniola??[edit] As far as I know this is a common missconception the slovenian government used as an excuse for the pan-slavic colors when the flag was formed. The flag of Carniola actually bears green instead of the blue on the slovenian flag. Correct me if I'm wrong. Nerby (talk) 17:58, 25 February 2008 (UTC) You're wrong. Viator slovenicus (talk) 19:09, 25 February 2008 (UTC) He is correct as far as that the coat of arms was really used as an excuse to introduce panslavic colours in the 19th century. And Viator, I think we'll have to rework the part about the uniqueness of the austrian government's response to the flag. Provincial flags were recognized, ethnic flags weren't. In other places where provincial flags were also ethnic flags, e.g. Bohemia and Croatia, the flags were recognized just as in Carniola, and the Croatian one was a tricolour. The Hungarian flag was also recognized after 1867. In short, there seems to be nothing particularly unique about it. Zocky | picture popups Indeed, there are plenty of indications that the Carniolan coat of arms was used as a instrumental legitimation for what the Romantic nationalists perceived as Slavic colours (I wouldn't say Pan-Slavic, though, most of them were opposed to Pan-Slavism). In the first months, it was used as a Slovene national flag, but at the same time the revolutionaries officially petitioned that the tricolour be recognized as the flag of Carniola. They succeeded. This is the unique feature. While in other cases, the Austrian authorities prohibited the use of revolutionary symbols, this particular revolutionary symbol actually achieved official recognition (although of course not as a national flag, but as the provincial flag of Carniola). This also meant that Carniola was the only province with a tricolur, with the exeption of Croatia-Slavonia (which was a combination of two bicolours). Hungary is a different case, the recognition of the Hungarian tricolour was part of the 1867 compromise which introduced the Austro-Hungarian Monarchy instead of the Austrian Empire; in the article, we are dealing with the latter, not the former. In Bohemia, it was the other way around: the provincial white-red bicolour was (sometimes) used as the Czech national flag (although I'm not sure if that was very often). Anyway, if you feel the formulation is unclear, go ahead and change it. I myself find it not too good, but I can't think of a better formulation right now. Viator slovenicus (talk) 23:22, 20 March 2009 (UTC) Slovenian naval jack[edit] In the Law of the coat of arms, fleg and national anthem (Zakon o grbu, zastavi in himni Republike Slovenije ter o slovenski narodni zastavi (ZGZH)Ur.l. RS, št. 67/1994, ammended: Ur.l. RS, št. 14/1999 Odl.US: U-I-296/94) it is explicitly stated that the maritime flag (=naval jack =pomorska zastava) is the same as the state flag. Reversal of my edits by Viator slovenicus is not justified. The odd white-blue-yelow flag is indeed described as the maritime flag of Slovenia in some web references, which obviously can not be trusted. MGTom (talk) 08:49, 26 April 2009 (UTC) No, naval jack IS NOT "pomorska zastava". (Don't worry, vexicological terminology is a rather complicated thing.) As far as I know, the Slovenian naval jack is still the one established by minister Jelko Kacin in 1996. If you have updates, pls. let us know. In any case, I think this jack (even if obsolete - although I don't think so), should be mentioned in the article. Best wishes, Viator slovenicus (talk) 16:25, 26 April 2009 (UTC) After further research I admit to have been in error. There is indeed a white-blue-yelow naval jack (zastava na premcu) defined in a ministerial regulation. The most recent edition of the regulation is: Pravilnik o registraciji in označevanju vozil, zrakoplovov in vodnih plovil Ministrstva za obrambo, Uradni list RS, št. 116/2007 z dne 17.12.2007 accessible at [1] MGTom (talk) 23:04, 27 April 2009 (UTC) Naval jack ≠ Naval ensign. There is a slight error in the info box. The white-blue-yellow flag is only used as a naval jack (slo. zastava na premcu) and not as a naval ensign (which in case of Slovenia is identical to the National flag). An example of this arrangement can be seen in this photo. So if we want to keep the white-blue-yellow flag in the info box its description should be changed to "Naval jack". Source: Article 46, Paragraphs 1-3 of the Rules on the Registration and Marking of Vehicles, Aircraft and Vessels of Ministry of Defence (Official Gazette of the Republic of Slovenia no. 116/07).--Qgzw (talk) 10:14, 15 October 2013 (UTC) Presidential flag - Border color order[edit] The colors on the border of the presidential flag are displayed in an incorrect order - white, red, blue. According to Article 48 Paragraph 1 of the Rules on the Registration and Marking of Vehicles, Aircraft and Vessels of the Ministry of Defence (The Official Gazette of the Republic of Slovenia, No. 116/2007) the order of the colors on the border of the presidential flag is the same as the Slovenian tricolor - white, blue, red. The error is due to the fact that the author of the presidential flag on wikipedia based his design on an incorrect rendition. Qgzw (talk) 02:19, 11 October 2013 (UTC) I'm not sure which image are you discussing. The image that is currently used in the article (File:Standard of the President of Slovenia.svg) has the following colours from the inside to the outside: white, blue, red. This is the same as the national flag of Slovenia that has these colours following each other from the top to the bottom. --Eleassar my talk 07:35, 11 October 2013 (UTC) Yes, I'm refering to the (File:Standard of the President of Slovenia.svg). From the outside in, the current color order is: white, red, blue. It should be: white, blue, red as detailed in "Risba št. 10" at the end of the The Official Gazette proclamation that I referenced in my original post. --Qgzw (talk) 01:19, 12 October 2013 (UTC) I drew this for an easier visualization of the error. --Qgzw (talk) 09:50, 15 October 2013 (UTC) Thanks. I agree that the image should be updated. Feel welcome to update it. --Eleassar my talk 11:00, 15 October 2013 (UTC) Slovakian tricolor[edit] Whoever suggested that the article on the SLOVAKIAN flag should be merged with this one (see the two suggestions at the top of the article)? Slovakia's a completely different country, and there's quite enough confusion already!!!212.30.86.78 (talk) 10:46, 26 December 2015 (UTC) Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Talk:Flag_of_Slovenia&oldid=696850159" Categories: Start-Class heraldry and vexillology articles WikiProject Heraldry and vexillology articles Start-Class Slovenia articles High-importance Slovenia articles Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Article Talk Variants Views Read Edit New section View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Featured content Current events Random article Donate to Wikipedia Wikipedia store Interaction Help About Wikipedia Community portal Recent changes Contact page Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Print/export Create a book Download as PDF Printable version Languages This page was last modified on 26 December 2015, at 10:47. Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view