Daniel Handler - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Daniel Handler From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to: navigation, search Not to be confused with actor Daniel Hendler. Daniel Handler Handler at a party celebrating the publication of The End, the thirteenth and final installment of A Series of Unfortunate Events, on October 12, 2006, in New York City Born Daniel J. Handler[1] (1970-02-28) February 28, 1970 (age 46) San Francisco, California, United States Pen name Lemony Snicket Occupation Novelist, screenwriter, musician. Nationality American Period April 1998–present Genre Children's literature Subject none Literary movement none Notable works A Series of Unfortunate Events, All the Wrong Questions, The Basic Eight, Watch Your Mouth, Adverbs Spouse Lisa Brown[2] Signature Daniel Handler (born February 28, 1970) is an American writer and journalist. He is best known for his work under the pen name Lemony Snicket, having published children's series A Series of Unfortunate Events and All the Wrong Questions under this pseudonym. He has also published adult novels under his real name; his first book The Basic Eight was rejected by many publishers for its dark subject matter. His most recent book is We Are Pirates. Handler has also played the accordion in several bands. Contents 1 Personal life 2 Professional work 2.1 Books 2.1.1 Lemony Snicket 2.2 Music 2.2.1 Discography 2.3 Film and television 2.3.1 Filmography 2.3.2 Television credits 3 Controversy 4 Bibliography 4.1 Books published as Daniel Handler 4.2 What the Swedes Read columns in The Believer 5 References 6 External links Personal life[edit] Handler was born in San Francisco, California, the son of Sandra Handler Day (née Walpole) and retired City College of San Francisco Dean, and Louis Handler, an accountant.[3] His father was a Jewish refugee from Germany, and he is distantly related to British writer Hugh Walpole[4][5] through his mother. He has a younger sister, Rebecca Handler. Handler has been a voracious reader since childhood, and his favorite author was William Keepers Maxwell, Jr.[6] He attended Commodore Sloat Elementary, Herbert Hoover Middle School, and Lowell High School. He graduated from Wesleyan University in 1992.[7] He is an alumnus of the San Francisco Boys Chorus. He is married to Lisa Brown, a graphic artist whom he met in college. They have a son, Otto Handler, born in 2003. They live in an old Victorian house in San Francisco. Handler is politically active and helped form LitPAC. In the June 10, 2007 edition of The New York Times Magazine, Handler revealed ambivalence toward his wealth and the expectations that it creates. He stated that he is often asked for money for charitable causes and often gives.[8] He has supported the Occupy Wall Street movement.[9][unreliable source?] Handler describes himself as a secular humanist.[10] In addition, he says, "I'm not a believer in predetermined fates, being rewarded for one's efforts. I'm not a believer in karma. The reason why I try to be a good person is because I think it's the right thing to do. If I commit fewer bad acts there will be fewer bad acts, maybe other people will join in committing fewer bad acts, and in time there will be fewer and fewer of them."[11] Professional work[edit] Books[edit] Four of Daniel Handler's major works have been published under his name. His first, The Basic Eight, was rejected by many publishers for its subject matter and tone (a dark view of a teenage girl's life). Handler claims that the novel was rejected 37 times before finally being published. Watch Your Mouth, his second novel, was completed before The Basic Eight was published. It follows a more operatic theme, complete with stage directions and various acts. It is described by HarperCollins, the book's reprint publisher, as an "incest opera", mixing Jewish mythology with modern sexuality. Watch Your Mouth's second half replaces the opera troupe with the form of a 12-step recovery program, linguistically undergone by the protagonist. In April 2006, Handler published Adverbs, a collection of short stories that he says are "about love." In January 2011, Why We Broke Up was released; it received a 2012 Michael L. Printz honor award.[12] He served as a judge for the PEN/Phyllis Naylor Working Writer Fellowship in 2012.[13] Handler's most recent adult novel is titled We Are Pirates[14] and is about a modern-age pirate who "wants to be an old-fashioned kind of pirate."[15] It was released on February 3, 2015.[16][17] Lemony Snicket[edit] Main article: Lemony Snicket Daniel Handler signing copies of his books at a promotion for A Series of Unfortunate Events Handler began writing A Series of Unfortunate Events under the Snicket pseudonym in 1998. The books concern three orphaned children who experience progressively terrible events following the alleged death of their parents and burning of their home (done by a man named Count Olaf and his troupe of associates), and Snicket acts as the narrator and biographer of the fictional orphans.[18] He has also narrated the audiobooks for three consecutive books in the series, before deciding to quit because he found it too difficult, handing back the narrating job to the original narrator, Tim Curry. Handler has also appeared at author appearances as "Lemony Snicket's handler," as well as appearing as Snicket himself in various other books and media, including the commentary track for the film version of his books, Lemony Snicket's A Series of Unfortunate Events. He also wrote an introduction to Lemony Snicket: The Unauthorized Autobiography under his own name. The Lemony Snicket books have been international best-sellers, and the 13th and final installment of the series came out Friday, October 13, 2006. On the day the thirteenth book came out, Handler appeared on the Today show as Lemony Snicket's representative. Handler has also written some short fiction and picture books under the Lemony Snicket pseudonym. As part of his support of Occupy Wall Street, Handler wrote "Thirteen Observations made by Lemony Snicket while watching Occupy Wall Street from a Discreet Distance", which was published on the Occupy Writers website. Handler has recently completed a series of novels, All the Wrong Questions, which serve as prequels to A Series of Unfortunate Events. Lemony Snicket has his own website which has a section about "The Afflicted Author". In this autobiographical section, Snicket is very vague, saying things such as: "His family has roots in a part of the country which is now underwater" and, without any previous mention of this scandal, "The aftermath of the scandal was swift, brutal and inaccurately reported in the periodicals of the day". Also on this site, Mr. Snicket discusses his "representative" to the public, Daniel Handler. He does not go in depth about Handler, but states, "Mr. Handler has had a relatively uneventful life..."[19] HarperCollins Publishers published a short interview with Lemony Snicket on their website, asking personal questions, such as "What were some of your hobbies as a child?" to which Snicket answered, "Taxidermy and playing the harpsichord."[20] Music[edit] Handler was in two bands following college, The Edith Head Trio and Tzamboni, but it wasn't until 69 Love Songs, a three-album set by The Magnetic Fields, that his music attracted attention. Handler played accordion on a number of tracks in 69 Love Songs. In the box set of the project, Handler provides a lengthy interview with band leader Stephin Merritt about the project, as well as conversations about each song. Handler also appears in the 2009 documentary Strange Powers, by Kerthy Fix and Gail O'Hara, about Merritt and the Magnetic Fields. He has gone on to play accordion in several other Merritt projects, including music by The Magnetic Fields, The 6ths and The Gothic Archies, the last of which provided songs for the audiobooks in the A Series of Unfortunate Events children's book series. On October 10, 2006, an album by the Gothic Archies was released with all thirteen songs from the thirteen audiobooks in A Series of Unfortunate Events, along with two bonus songs. In the audio commentary on the film adaptation Lemony Snicket's A Series of Unfortunate Events, Handler plays a song about how depressing it is to have leeches in a film. Daniel Handler wrote the lyrics to the song "Radio," performed by One Ring Zero, and the lyrics to "The Gibbons Girl" by Chris Ewen's The Hidden Variable. Discography[edit] 69 Love Songs – The Magnetic Fields Hyacinths and Thistles – The 6ths The Tragic Treasury: Songs from A Series of Unfortunate Events – The Gothic Archies Distortion – The Magnetic Fields Nevermind the Context – Moth Wranglers The Composer Is Dead – A collaboration with Nathaniel Stookey, premiered in San Francisco at Davies Symphony Hall on July 8, 2006 Realism – The Magnetic Fields "Barricade" – Stars Film and television[edit] Handler has also had some success in film work. He produced the screenplay for Rick, which was based on the Verdi opera Rigoletto, as well as Kill the Poor, which was based on the novel by Joel Rose. Handler was involved in the screenwriting process for the film Lemony Snicket's A Series of Unfortunate Events, but was ultimately removed from the project. He had completed eight separate drafts of the film before giving up following a change in those who were producing the film. Robert Gordon (screenwriter of Galaxy Quest) was hired to replace Handler and eventually received credit for the film's screenplay, under Handler's request. Handler did submit a commentary track for the DVD version, alongside director Brad Silberling. In character as Lemony Snicket, he derides the Lemony Snicket in the film – played by Jude Law – as an impostor, as well as choosing to play accordion and sing about leeches rather than pay attention to the film. At numerous times during the track he shows great sympathy towards the Baudelaire children, and implies that he is being held captive by the director in order to do the commentary. Filmography[edit] Rick (2003) Lemony Snicket's A Series of Unfortunate Events (2004) Kill the Poor (2006) Television credits[edit] A Series of Unfortunate Events - Executive Producer[citation needed] Controversy[edit] At the National Book Awards ceremony in November 2014, Handler made a controversial remark after author Jacqueline Woodson was presented with an award for young people's literature. Woodson, who is black, won the award for Brown Girl Dreaming. During the ceremony, Handler noted that Woodson is allergic to watermelon, a reference to the racist watermelon stereotype. His comments were immediately criticized;[21][22] Handler apologized via Twitter and donated $10,000 to We Need Diverse Books, and promised to match donations up to $100,000.[23] In a New York Times op-ed published shortly thereafter, "The Pain of the Watermelon Joke", Jacqueline Woodson explained that "in making light of that deep and troubled history" with his joke, Daniel Handler had come from a place of ignorance, but underscored the need for her mission to "give people a sense of this country's brilliant and brutal history, so no one ever thinks they can walk onto a stage one evening and laugh at another's too often painful past".[24][25][26] Bibliography[edit] Further information: Lemony Snicket bibliography Handler has published a variety of books under the name Lemony Snicket; this section lists works published under his own name. Books published as Daniel Handler[edit] Handler, Daniel. The Basic Eight. New York: Thomas Dunne 1995.  Watch Your Mouth St. Martin's Press/HarperCollins (2000) How to Dress for Every Occasion, by the Pope (with illustrations by Sarah "Pinkie" Bennett, pseudonym for Lisa Brown) McSweeney's (2005) Adverbs St. Martin's Press/HarperCollins (2006) Why We Broke Up (2011) We Are Pirates (2014) As editor or contributor: Nonsense Novels by Stephen Leacock (Introduction) New York Review of Books Classics (2004) Noisy Outlaws, Unfriendly Blobs and Some Other Things That Aren't as Scary, Maybe, Depending on How You Feel About Lost Lands, Stray Cellphones, Creatures from the Sky, Parents Who Disappear in Peru, a Man Named Lars Farf and One Other Story We Couldn't Quite Finish, So Maybe You Could Help Us Out by McSweeney's (Introduction and Unfinished story) The Confidence-Man: His Masquerade by Herman Melville (Preface) Dalkey Archive Press (2007) The Hour: A Cocktail Manifesto by Bernard DeVoto (Introduction) Republished by Tin House Books (2010) "Half-Minute Horrors" What the Swedes Read columns in The Believer[edit] "A reader makes his way through one book by each Nobel Laureate." Year Country Nobel Laureate Work discussed Issue and date 1959 Italy Salvatore Quasimodo The selected writings; (trans) Allen Mandelbaum 11/3 (Mar-Apr 2013) References[edit] ^ http://www.californiabirthindex.org/birth/daniel_j_handler_born_1970_10947102 ^ Jeffries, Stuart (7 February 2015). "Daniel Handler: ‘How old does a child need to be to appreciate Lemony Snicket?’". The Guardian. Retrieved 11 May 2015.  ^ "Lemony Snicket". The Wee Web. 2011. Retrieved January 24, 2011.  ^ Salamon, Julie (September 23, 2004). "Lemony Snicket's Down and Dirty Indie". The New York Times. Retrieved January 24, 2011.  ^ Westbrook, Caroline (June 5, 2006). "Daniel Handler interview". SomethingJewish. Retrieved January 24, 2011.  ^ "Daniel Handler: By the Book". New York Times. 22 January 2015. Retrieved 11 May 2015.  ^ Sparks, Karen. "Daniel Handler". Encyclopedia Britannica. Encyclopedia Britannica. Retrieved 11 May 2015.  ^ Handler, Daniel (June 10, 2007). "Adjusted Income". The New York Times Magazine. Retrieved August 15, 2014.  ^ Occupy Writers ^ "CNN.com – Lemony Snicket reaches 'The End' – Oct 5, 2006". CNN. Retrieved April 30, 2010.  ^ WORLD Magazine | Today's News, Christian Views ^ [1] ^ "2012 PEN/Phyllis Naylor Working Writer Fellowship". PEN American Center. Retrieved February 6, 2013.  ^ http://columbiajournal.org/issues/issue-51/journal-51-table-of-contents/daniel-handler ^ Minzesheimer, Bob (October 11, 2006). "An 'Unfortunate' end". USA Today.  ^ "We Are Pirates: A Novel". Amazon. Retrieved February 10, 2015.  ^ http://www.reddit.com/r/IAmA/comments/21xynj/this_is_daniel_handler_aka_lemony_snicket_trapped/cghi47w ^ "Tortuous Tales". A Series of Unfortunate Events. n.p. Retrieved 2012-04-16. ^ Snicket, Lemony. "The Afflicted Author". A Series of Unfortunate Events. Retrieved 2012-04-16. http://www.lemonysnicket.com/author.html ^ HarperCollins Publishers. "Author Interview with Lemony Snicket". HarperCollins Publishers. 2012. Retrieved 2012-04-14. http://www.harpercollins.com/author/AuthorExtra.aspx?displayType=interview&authorID=14581 ^ Gambino, Lauren (20 November 2014). "Lemony Snicket apologizes for watermelon joke about black writer at National Book Awards". The Guardian (London). Retrieved 21 November 2014.  ^ Cohen, Anne (November 20, 2014). "Lemony Snicket's Series of Unfortunate Racist Jokes". The Jewish Daily Forward. Retrieved 30 November 2014.  ^ Ohlheiser, Abby (21 November 2014). "Daniel Handler does more than apologize for his 'watermelon' joke". The Washington Post. Retrieved 30 November 2014.  ^ Woodson, Jacqueline (28 November 2014). "The Pain of the Watermelon Joke". The New York Times. Retrieved 30 November 2014.  ^ Frizell, Sam (29 November 2014). "Jacqueline Woodson Responds to Racist Watermelon Joke". Time. Retrieved 30 November 2014.  ^ "Award-Winning Author Jacqueline Woodson Responds To Racist Joke". The Huffington Post. Associated Press. 29 November 2014. Retrieved 30 November 2014.  External links[edit] Wikiquote has quotations related to: Daniel Handler Wikimedia Commons has media related to Daniel Handler. Official website All the Wrong Questions (official) A Series of Unfortunate Events (official) Daniel Handler at the Internet Movie Database Biography at Barclay Agency Daniel Handler at Library of Congress Authorities, with 10 catalog records, and Handler at WorldCat Lemony Snicket at LC Authorities, with 45 records, and Snicket at WorldCat v t e Works of Daniel Handler Novels The Basic Eight Watch Your Mouth Adverbs Why We Broke Up Screenplays Lemony Snicket's A Series of Unfortunate Events (source material) Rick Kill the Poor See also Lemony Snicket Authority control WorldCat Identities VIAF: 107605420 LCCN: n98075683 ISNI: 0000 0001 2146 6844 GND: 1074123808 SUDOC: 128725338 BNF: cb15786623g (data) MusicBrainz: 283a74d8-ba3f-4710-8e59-22eb7caad238 NDL: 00858710 Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Daniel_Handler&oldid=710275787" Categories: Daniel Handler 1970 births 20th-century American novelists 21st-century American novelists American Jews American accordionists American children's writers American humanists American male novelists American male screenwriters American short story writers Audio book narrators Living people Wesleyan University alumni Jewish American novelists Jewish humanists American horror writers Postmodern writers Pseudonymous writers Writers from San Francisco, California American male short story writers Hidden categories: Use mdy dates from December 2013 All articles lacking reliable references Articles lacking reliable references from April 2014 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from February 2015 Commons category with page title same as on Wikidata Official website different in Wikidata and Wikipedia Wikipedia articles with VIAF identifiers Wikipedia articles with LCCN identifiers Wikipedia articles with ISNI identifiers Wikipedia articles with GND identifiers Wikipedia articles with BNF identifiers Wikipedia articles with MusicBrainz identifiers Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Article Talk Variants Views Read Edit View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Featured content Current events Random article Donate to Wikipedia Wikipedia store Interaction Help About Wikipedia Community portal Recent changes Contact page Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Cite this page Print/export Create a book Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Languages አማርኛ العربية Български Bosanski Català Čeština Eesti Español فارسی Français 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Bahasa Melayu 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Русский Simple English Suomi Svenska Türkçe اردو 中文 Edit links This page was last modified on 16 March 2016, at 00:32. Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view