Ensign - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Ensign From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia   (Redirected from National ensign) Jump to: navigation, search This article is about the flag. For the rank, see Ensign (rank). For other uses, see Ensign (disambiguation). National civil ensign of New Zealand flown from the stern of Hikitia An ensign is, in its widest sense, a flag or other standard.[1] In particular, ensign has commonly been used to mean the flag or other standard of a ship or military unit. Today, the term is most commonly used in reference to ships, where the ensign is the largest flag, generally flown at the stern (back) of the ship. Naval ensigns today do indicate the ship's (nominal) nationality, but may be a specifically naval ensign rather than the normal national flag. The military rank of ensign,[2] once responsible for bearing a unit's standard (whether national or regimental) derives from it (in the cavalry the equivalent rank was cornet, named after a type of flag). Large versions of naval ensigns called battle ensigns are used when a warship goes into battle. The ensign of the French régiment de Navarre, 1745. Ensigns, such as the ancient Roman ensigns seen here in the Arch of Constantine, are not always flags. Contents 1 National ensigns 2 Heraldic ensigns 3 Air ensigns 4 Gallery 5 References 5.1 Citations 5.2 Sources National ensigns[edit] See also: Maritime flag In nautical use, the ensign is flown on a ship or boat to indicate its appartenance. While this includes its nationality,[2] it may well indicate more information (e.g. civilian, military, or police vessel) rather than being the national flag itself. This is particularly common for commonwealth and European countries. Ensigns are usually at the stern flagstaff when in port, and may be shifted to a gaff (if available) when the ship is under way, becoming known as a steaming ensign. Vexillologists distinguish three varieties of a national flag when used as an ensign: A civil ensign (usage symbol ) is worn by merchant and pleasure vessels. In some countries the yacht ensign, used on recreational boats or ships instead of merchant vessels, differs from the civil ensign. A state ensign or government ensign (usage symbol ) is worn by government vessels, such as coast guard ships. A naval ensign (usage symbol ) is used by a country's navy.[3] Many countries do not distinguish between these uses, and employ only one national flag and ensign in all cases. Others (like the United Kingdom, Ukraine, Italy, Russia, South Africa, Australia, New Zealand, and Japan) use different ensigns. Such ensigns are strictly regulated and indicate if the boat is a warship, a merchant vessel or a yacht, for example. Several Commonwealth countries' national flags had their origin in the ensigns of their original colonising power, the United Kingdom. Most notable of these national flags are those of Australia, New Zealand, and several smaller island nations. It is also very likely that the original design from which the flag of the United States developed was strongly influenced by the British Red Ensign or the flag of the (British controlled) East India Company.[citation needed] Heraldic ensigns[edit] This section requires expansion. (June 2007) In heraldry, an ensign is the ornament or sign, such as the crown, coronet, or mitre, borne above the charge or arms.[4] Air ensigns[edit] With the creation of independent air forces and the growth in civil aviation in the first half of the 20th century, a range of distinguishing flags and ensigns were adopted. These may be divided into air force ensigns (often light blue in colour,[5] such as the Royal Air Force Ensign) and civil air ensigns. Gallery[edit] Royal Australian Navy ensign (foreground), Royal Australian Navy jack (background)  Royal Australian Air Force Ensign  Finnish yacht club ensign. The circled X represents the club emblem  Indian Navy Ensign  Naval ensign of Italy  Naval ensign of the Imperial Japanese Navy and the Japan Maritime Self-Defense Force  North Korean navy ensign  Polish Navy ensign  Ensign of the Russian Navy  Spanish yacht ensign  Naval ensign of Sri Lanka  Ukrainian Navy ensign  The Red Ensign as currently used for British civilian vessels  United States Coast Guard ensign  References[edit] Citations[edit] ^ http://www.oxforddictionaries.com/definition/english/ensign ^ a b Znamierowski. "Types of flags". The world encyclopedia of flags. p. 31.  ^ Znamierowski. "Naval ensigns and flags". The world encyclopedia of flags. p. 88.  ^ Snell, Melissa. "Pimbley's Dictionary of Heraldry".  ^ Znamierowski. "Air force flags". The world encyclopedia of flags. p. 85.  Sources[edit] Znamierowski, Alfred (2002). The world encyclopedia of flags : The definitive guide to international flags, banners, standards and ensigns. London: Hermes House. ISBN 1-84309-042-2.  Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ensign&oldid=715615796" Categories: Ensigns Vexillology Maritime culture Hidden categories: All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from February 2015 Articles to be expanded from June 2007 All articles to be expanded Articles using small message boxes Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Article Talk Variants Views Read Edit View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Featured content Current events Random article Donate to Wikipedia Wikipedia store Interaction Help About Wikipedia Community portal Recent changes Contact page Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Cite this page Print/export Create a book Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Languages Afrikaans Български Brezhoneg Català Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Español עברית Nederlands 日本語 Polski Русский Svenska Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links This page was last modified on 16 April 2016, at 23:07. Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view