Armed forces - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Armed forces From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to: navigation, search For other uses, see armed forces (disambiguation). This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (September 2015) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) Part of a series about War History Prehistoric Ancient Medieval Early modern Industrial Modern Fourth-generation warfare Battlespace Air Cyber Information Land Sea Space Weapons Armor Artillery Biological Cavalry Chemical Conventional Cyber Electronic Infantry Nuclear Psychological Unconventional Tactics Aerial Battle Cavalry Charge Counter-attack Counter-insurgency Cover Foxhole Guerrilla warfare Morale Siege Tactical objective Trench warfare Operational Blitzkrieg Deep battle Maneuver warfare Operational manoeuvre group Strategy Attrition Counter-offensive Deception Defensive Goal Naval Offensive Grand strategy Containment Economic warfare Limited war Military science Philosophy of war Strategic studies Total war Organization Command and control Doctrine Education and training Engineers Intelligence Ranks Staff Technology and equipment Logistics Materiel Supply chain management Related Asymmetric warfare Broken-Backed War Theory Cold war Irregular warfare Law of war Mercenary Military campaign Military operation Network-centric warfare Operations research Principles of war Proxy war Religious war Slavery Theater War crimes War film War novel Wartime sexual violence World war Lists Battles Military occupations Operations Sieges War crimes Wars Weapons Writers v t e The Armed forces of a country are its government-sponsored defense, fighting forces, and organizations. They exist to further the foreign and domestic policies of their governing body and to defend that body and the nation it represents from external and internal aggressors. In broad usage, the terms "armed forces" and "military" are often treated synonymously, although in technical usage a distinction is sometimes made in which a country's armed forces may include both its military and other paramilitary forces. Armed force is the use of armed forces to achieve political objectives. The study of the use of armed forces is called military science. Broadly speaking, this involves considering offense and defense at three "levels": strategy, operational art, and tactics. All three levels study the application of the use of force in order to achieve a desired objective. Countries by number of active soldiers (2009) Contents 1 Organization 2 Benefits and costs 3 See also 4 References Organization[edit] Main article: Military organization In most countries the basis of the armed forces is the military, divided into basic military branches. However, armed forces can include other paramilitary structures. Benefits and costs[edit] Map of the military expenditures as a percentage of GDP by country, CIA figures. Military spending in 2007, in USD, according to the Stockholm International Peace Research Institute. The obvious benefit to a country in maintaining armed forces is in providing protection from foreign threats and from internal conflict. In recent decades armed forces personnel have also been used as emergency civil support roles in post-disaster situations. On the other hand, they may also harm a society by engaging in counter-productive (or merely unsuccessful) warfare. Expenditure on science and technology to develop weapons and systems sometimes produces side benefits, although some claim that greater benefits could come from targeting the money directly.[1][2] See also[edit] Deterrence theory Mercenary Militaria Military fiat Military history Military incompetence Military intelligence Military dictatorship Military junta Military rule (disambiguation) Military Aid to the Civil Power Military Aid to the Civil Community Standing army Civil-military relations Armed forces of the world List of militaries by country List of militaries that recruit foreigners List of countries by military expenditures List of countries by number of military and paramilitary personnel List of countries without armed forces List of air forces List of armies List of navies References[edit] ^ http://www.usnews.com/debate-club/are-cuts-to-the-defense-budget-necessary ^ http://www.businessinsider.com/we-should-cut-military-spending-gradually-2013-2 War portal Authority control NDL: 00562612 Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Armed_forces&oldid=712717230" Categories: Military Hidden categories: Articles needing additional references from September 2015 All articles needing additional references Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Article Talk Variants Views Read Edit View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Featured content Current events Random article Donate to Wikipedia Wikipedia store Interaction Help About Wikipedia Community portal Recent changes Contact page Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Cite this page Print/export Create a book Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikinews Languages العربية Aragonés Azərbaycanca বাংলা Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца)‎ Български Буряад Català Чӑвашла Čeština Cymraeg Eesti Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Gaeilge Galego 한국어 Հայերեն Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Italiano Къарачай-малкъар ქართული Қазақша Latina Lietuvių Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk nynorsk Polski Português Română Русиньскый Русский Scots සිංහල Slovenčina Slovenščina کوردیی ناوەندی Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog Татарча/tatarça Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt Winaray 粵語 中文 Edit links This page was last modified on 30 March 2016, at 18:43. Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view