War - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia War From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to: navigation, search This article is about war in general. For other uses, see War (disambiguation) and The War (disambiguation). "Conflict zone" redirects here. For the 2001 video game, see Conflict Zone. This article's tone or style may not reflect the encyclopedic tone used on Wikipedia. See Wikipedia's guide to writing better articles for suggestions. (October 2015) The War by Tadeusz Cyprian (1949), a photograph in the collection of the National Museum in Warsaw showing ruins of Warsaw's Napoleon Square in the aftermath of World War II. Part of a series about War History Prehistoric Ancient Medieval Early modern Industrial Modern Fourth-generation warfare Battlespace Air Cyber Information Land Sea Space Weapons Armor Artillery Biological Cavalry Chemical Conventional Cyber Electronic Infantry Nuclear Psychological Unconventional Tactics Aerial Battle Cavalry Charge Counter-attack Counter-insurgency Cover Foxhole Guerrilla warfare Morale Siege Tactical objective Trench warfare Operational Blitzkrieg Deep battle Maneuver warfare Operational manoeuvre group Strategy Attrition Counter-offensive Deception Defensive Goal Naval Offensive Grand strategy Containment Economic warfare Limited war Military science Philosophy of war Strategic studies Total war Organization Command and control Doctrine Education and training Engineers Intelligence Ranks Staff Technology and equipment Logistics Materiel Supply chain management Related Asymmetric warfare Broken-Backed War Theory Cold war Irregular warfare Law of war Mercenary Military campaign Military operation Network-centric warfare Operations research Principles of war Proxy war Religious war Slavery Theater War crimes War film War novel Wartime sexual violence World war Lists Battles Military occupations Operations Sieges War crimes Wars Weapons Writers v t e War is a state of armed conflict between societies. It is generally characterized by extreme collective aggression, destruction, and usually high mortality. An absence of war is usually called "peace". Total war is warfare that is not restricted to purely legitimate military targets, and can result in massive civilian or other non-combatant casualties. While some scholars see war as a universal and ancestral aspect of human nature,[1] others argue that it is only a result of specific socio-cultural or ecological circumstances.[2] In 2013 war resulted in 31,000 deaths down from 72,000 deaths in 1990.[3] The deadliest war in history, in terms of the cumulative number of deaths since its start, is the Second World War, from 1939 to 1945, with 60–85 million deaths, followed by the Mongol conquests[4] which was greater than 41 million.[5] Proportionally speaking, the most destructive war in modern history is the War of the Triple Alliance, which took the lives of over 60% of Paraguay's population, according to Steven Pinker. In 2003, Richard Smalley identified war as the sixth (of ten) biggest problem facing humanity for the next fifty years.[6] War usually results in significant deterioration of infrastructure and the ecosystem, a decrease in social spending, famine, large-scale emigration from the war zone, and often the mistreatment of prisoners of war or civilians.[7][8][9] Another byproduct of some wars is the prevalence of propaganda by some or all parties in the conflict,[10] and increased revenues by weapons manufacturers.[11] Contents 1 Etymology 2 Types 3 Behaviour and conduct 4 History 4.1 Throughout history 4.1.1 Nine largest by death toll 5 Effects 5.1 On military personnel 5.2 On civilians 5.3 On the economy 5.3.1 World War II 5.4 On the arts 6 Aims 6.1 Definition 6.2 Classification 7 Ongoing conflicts 8 Limiting and stopping 9 Theories for motivation 9.1 Psychoanalytic psychology 9.2 Evolutionary 9.3 Economic 9.4 Marxist 9.5 Demographic 9.5.1 Malthusian 9.5.2 Youth bulge 9.6 Rationalist 9.7 Political science 9.7.1 System-level theories 9.7.2 Societal-level theories 9.7.3 Individual-level theories 10 Ethics 11 See also 12 References 12.1 Bibliography 13 External links Etymology Mural of War (1896), by Gari Melchers The English word war derives from the late Old English (circa.1050) words wyrre and werre, from Old French werre (also guerre as in modern French), in turn from the Frankish *werra, ultimately deriving from the Proto-Germanic *werzō 'mixture, confusion'. The word is related to the Old Saxon werran, Old High German werran, and the German verwirren, meaning “to confuse”, “to perplex”, and “to bring into confusion”.[12] In German, the equivalent is Krieg (from Proto-Germanic *krīganą 'to strive, be stubborn'); the Spanish, Portuguese, and Italian term for "war" is guerra, derived like the Old French term from the Germanic word.[13] Etymologic legend has it that the Romanic peoples adopted a foreign, Germanic word for "war", to avoid using the Latin bellum, because, when sounded, it tended to merge with the sound of the word bello ("beautiful").[citation needed] The scholarly study of war is sometimes called polemology (American English: /ˌpɑːləˈmɑːlədʒi/ pah-lə-MAHL-ə-jee), from the Greek polemos, meaning "war", and -logy, meaning "the study of". Types Main article: Types of war War must entail some degree of confrontation using weapons and other military technology and equipment by armed forces employing military tactics and operational art within a broad military strategy subject to military logistics. Studies of war by military theorists throughout military history have sought to identify the philosophy of war, and to reduce it to a military science. Ruins of Guernica (1937). The Spanish Civil War was one of Europe's bloodiest and most brutal civil wars. Modern military science considers several factors before a national defence policy is created to allow a war to commence: the environment in the area(s) of combat operations, the posture that national forces will adopt on the commencement of a war, and the type of warfare that troops will be engaged in. Asymmetric warfare is a conflict between two populations of drastically different levels of military capability or size. Biological warfare, or germ warfare, is the use of weaponized biological toxins or infectious agents such as bacteria, viruses, and fungi. Chemical warfare involves the use of weaponized chemicals in combat. Poison gas as a chemical weapon was principally used during World War I, and resulted in an estimated 1.3 million casualties, including 100,000–260,000 civilians. Tens of thousands or more civilians and military personnel died from chemical weapon use.[14] Civil war is a war between forces belonging to the same nation or political entity. Conventional warfare is declared war between states in which nuclear, biological, or chemical weapons are not used or see limited deployment. Cyberwarfare involves the actions by a nation-state or international organization to attack and attempt to damage another nation's information systems. Nuclear warfare is warfare in which nuclear weapons are the primary, or a major, method of achieving capitulation. Total war is warfare by any means possible, disregarding the laws of war, placing no limits on legitimate military targets, using weapons and tactics that result in significant civilian casualties, or demanding a war effort that requires significant sacrifices by the friendly civilian population. Unconventional warfare, the opposite of conventional warfare, is an attempt to achieve military victory through acquiescence, capitulation, or clandestine support for one side of an existing conflict. War of aggression is a war for conquest or gain rather than self-defense; this can be the basis of war crimes under customary international law. Behaviour and conduct “ The nature of warfare never changes, only its superficial manifestations. Joshua and David, Hector and Achilles would recognize the combat that our soldiers and Marines have waged in the alleys of Somalia and Iraq. The uniforms evolve, bronze gives way to titanium, arrows may be replaced by laser-guided bombs, but the heart of the matter is still killing your enemies until any survivors surrender and do your will. ” — Ralph Peters[15] The behaviour of troops in warfare varies considerably, both individually and as units or armies. In some circumstances, troops may engage in genocide, war rape and ethnic cleansing. Commonly, however, the conduct of troops may be limited to posturing and sham attacks, leading to highly rule-bound and often largely symbolic combat in which casualties are much reduced from that which would be expected if soldiers were genuinely violent towards the enemy.[16] Situations of deliberate dampening of hostilities occurred in World War I by some accounts, e.g., a volley of gunfire being exchanged after a misplaced mortar hit the British line, after which a German soldier shouted an apology to British forces, effectively stopping a hostile exchange of gunfire.[17] Other examples of non-aggression, also from World War I, are detailed in Good-Bye to All That. These include spontaneous ceasefires to rebuild defences and retrieve casualties, alongside behaviour such as refusing to shoot at enemy during ablutions and the taking of great risks (described as 1 in 20) to retrieve enemy wounded from the battlefield. The most notable spontaneous ceasefire of World War I was the Christmas truce. The psychological separation between combatants, and the destructive power of modern weaponry, may act to override this effect and facilitate participation by combatants in the mass slaughter of combatants or civilians. The unusual circumstances of warfare can incite apparently normal individuals to commit atrocities.[18] Sociologists and historians often view dehumanization as central to war. History Main article: Military history The percentages of men killed in war in eight tribal societies, and Europe and the U.S. in the 20th century. (Lawrence H. Keeley, Archeologist) The earliest evidence of war belongs to the Mesolithic cemetery Site 117, which has been determined to be approximately 14,000 years old. About forty-five percent of the skeletons there displayed signs of violent death.[19] Since the rise of the state some 5,000 years ago,[20] military activity has occurred over much of the globe. The advent of gunpowder and the acceleration of technological advances led to modern warfare. According to Conway W. Henderson, "One source claims that 14,500 wars have taken place between 3500 BC and the late 20th century, costing 3.5 billion lives, leaving only 300 years of peace (Beer 1981: 20)."[21] In War Before Civilization, Lawrence H. Keeley, a professor at the University of Illinois, says that approximately 90–95% of known societies throughout history engaged in at least occasional warfare,[22] and many fought constantly.[23] Japanese samurai attacking a Mongol ship, 13th century F-15E deploys flares during a flight over Afghanistan, 12 November 2008 Keeley describes several styles of primitive combat such as small raids, large raids, and massacres. All of these forms of warfare were used by primitive societies, a finding supported by other researchers.[24] Keeley explains that early war raids were not well organized, as the participants did not have any formal training. Scarcity of resources meant that defensive works were not a cost effective way to protect the society against enemy raids.[25] William Rubinstein wrote that "Pre-literate societies, even those organised in a relatively advanced way, were renowned for their studied cruelty ... 'archaeology yields evidence of prehistoric massacres more severe than any recounted in ethnography [i.e., after the coming of the Europeans]'. At Crow Creek, South Dakota, as noted, archaeologists found a mass grave of 'more than 500 men, women, and children who had been slaughtered, scalped, and mutilated during an attack on their village a century and a half before Columbus's arrival (ca. AD 1325)' ".[26] It is problematic, however, to make generalizations regarding prehistoric violence, because the frequency and manifestation of warfare vary greatly in the ethnographic and archaeological record. According to the U.S. Bureau of the Census (1894), the Indian Wars of the 19th century cost the lives of about 19,000 whites and 30,000 Indians.[27] In Western Europe, since the late 18th century, more than 150 conflicts and about 600 battles have taken place.[28] During the 20th century, war resulted in a dramatic intensification of the pace of social changes, and was a crucial catalyst for the emergence of the Left as a force to be reckoned with.[29] Recent rapid increases in the technologies of war, and therefore in its destructiveness (see mutual assured destruction), have caused widespread public concern, and have in all probability forestalled, and may altogether prevent the outbreak of a nuclear World War III. At the end of each of the last two World Wars, concerted and popular efforts were made to come to a greater understanding of the underlying dynamics of war and to thereby hopefully reduce or even eliminate it altogether. These efforts materialized in the forms of the League of Nations, and its successor, the United Nations. Shortly after World War II, as a token of support for this concept, most nations joined the United Nations. During this same post-war period, with the aim of further delegitimizing war as an acceptable and logical extension of foreign policy[citation needed], most national governments also renamed their Ministries or Departments of War as their Ministries or Departments of Defense, for example, the former U.S. Department of War was renamed as the U.S. Department of Defense. In 1947, in view of the rapidly increasingly destructive consequences of modern warfare, and with a particular concern for the consequences and costs of the newly developed atom bomb, Albert Einstein famously stated, "I know not with what weapons World War III will be fought, but World War IV will be fought with sticks and stones."[30] Mao Zedong urged the socialist camp not to fear nuclear war with the United States since, even if "half of mankind died, the other half would remain while imperialism would be razed to the ground and the whole world would become socialist."[31] The Human Security Report 2005 documented a significant decline in the number and severity of armed conflicts since the end of the Cold War in the early 1990s. However, the evidence examined in the 2008 edition of the Center for International Development and Conflict Management's "Peace and Conflict" study indicated that the overall decline in conflicts had stalled.[32] Throughout history Main article: Wars Nine largest by death toll Main article: List of wars by death toll Three of the ten most costly wars, in terms of loss of life, have been waged in the last century. These are the two World Wars, followed by the Second Sino-Japanese War (which is sometimes considered part of World War II, or overlapping with that war). Most of the others involved China or neighboring peoples. The death toll of World War II, being 60 million plus, surpasses all other war-death-tolls. This may be due to significant recent advances in weapons technologies, as well as recent increases in the overall human population. [33] Deaths (millions) Date War 60.7–84.6 1939–1945 World War II (see World War II casualties) [34][35] 60 13th century Mongol Conquests (see Mongol invasions and Tatar invasions)[36][37][38] 40 1850–1864 Taiping Rebellion (see Dungan revolt)[39] 39 1914–1918 World War I (see World War I casualties)[40] 36 755–763 An Shi Rebellion (number exaggerated based on census system, but not considering the territorial shrink and inefficient census system afterwar）[41] 25 1616–1662 Qing dynasty conquest of Ming dynasty[33] 20 1937–1945 Second Sino-Japanese War[42] 20 1370–1405 Conquests of Tamerlane[43][44] 16 1862–1877 Dungan revolt 5–9 1917–1922 Russian Civil War and Foreign Intervention[45] Effects Disability-adjusted life year for war per 100,000 inhabitants in 2004[46]   no data   less than 100   100–200   200–600   600–1000   1000–1400   1400–1800   1800–2200   2200–2600   2600–3000   3000–8000   8000–8800   more than 8800 The Apotheosis of War (1871) by Vasily Vereshchagin On military personnel Military personnel subject to combat in war often suffer mental and physical injuries, including depression, posttraumatic stress disorder, disease, injury, and death. In every war in which American soldiers have fought in, the chances of becoming a psychiatric casualty – of being debilitated for some period of time as a consequence of the stresses of military life – were greater than the chances of being killed by enemy fire. — No More Heroes, Richard Gabriel[28] During World War II, research conducted by US Army Brigadier General S.L.A. Marshall found that, on average, only 15% to 20% of American riflemen in WWII combat fired at the enemy.[16] In Civil War Collector’s Encyclopedia, F.A. Lord notes that of the 27,574 discarded muskets found on the Gettysburg battlefield, nearly 90% were loaded, with 12,000 loaded more than once and 6,000 loaded 3 to 10 times. These studies suggest that most military personnel resist firing their weapons in combat, that – as some theorists argue – human beings have an inherent resistance to killing their fellow human beings.[16] Swank and Marchand’s WWII study found that after sixty days of continuous combat, 98% of all surviving military personnel will become psychiatric casualties. Psychiatric casualties manifest themselves in fatigue cases, confusional states, conversion hysteria, anxiety, obsessional and compulsive states, and character disorders.[16] One-tenth of mobilised American men were hospitalised for mental disturbances between 1942 and 1945, and after thirty-five days of uninterrupted combat, 98% of them manifested psychiatric disturbances in varying degrees. — 14–18: Understanding the Great War, Stéphane Audoin-Rouzeau, Annette Becker[28] Additionally, it has been estimated that anywhere from 18% to 54% of Vietnam war veterans suffered from Post Traumatic Stress Disorder.[16] Based on 1860 census figures, 8% of all white American males aged 13 to 43 died in the American Civil War, including about 6% in the North and approximately 18% in the South.[47] The war remains the deadliest conflict in American history, resulting in the deaths of 620,000 military personnel. United States military casualties of war since 1775 have totaled over two million. Of the 60 million European military personnel who were mobilized in World War I, 8 million were killed, 7 million were permanently disabled, and 15 million were seriously injured.[48] Why?, from The Disasters of War (Los desastres de la guerra), by Francisco Goya, 1812–15. A collection of depictions of the brutalities of the Napoleonic-Peninsular War. The remains of dead Crow Indians killed and scalped by Sioux c. 1874 Les Grandes Misères de la guerre depict the destruction unleashed on civilians during the Thirty Years' War. During Napoleon's retreat from Moscow, more French military personnel died of typhus than were killed by the Russians.[49] Of the 450,000 soldiers who crossed the Neman on 25 June 1812, less than 40,000 returned. More military personnel were killed from 1500–1914 by typhus than from military action.[50] In addition, if it were not for modern medical advances there would be thousands more dead from disease and infection. For instance, during the Seven Years' War, the Royal Navy reported that it conscripted 184,899 sailors, of whom 133,708 died of disease or were 'missing'.[51] It is estimated that between 1985 and 1994, 378,000 people per year died due to war.[52] On civilians See also: Civilian casualties Most wars have resulted in significant loss of life, along with destruction of infrastructure and resources (which may lead to famine, disease, and death in the civilian population). During the Thirty Years' War in Europe, the population of the Holy Roman Empire was reduced by 15 to 40 percent.[53][54] Civilians in war zones may also be subject to war atrocities such as genocide, while survivors may suffer the psychological aftereffects of witnessing the destruction of war. Most estimates of World War II casualties indicate that around 60 million people died, 40 million of which were civilians.[55] Deaths in the Soviet Union were around 27 million.[56] Since a high proportion of those killed were young men who had not yet fathered any children, population growth in the postwar Soviet Union was much lower than it otherwise would have been.[57] On the economy See also: Military Keynesianism Once a war has ended, losing nations are sometimes required to pay war reparations to the victorious nations. In certain cases, land is ceded to the victorious nations. For example, the territory of Alsace-Lorraine has been traded between France and Germany on three different occasions. Typically speaking, war becomes very intertwined with the economy and many wars are partially or entirely based on economic reasons. Some economists believe war can stimulate a country's economy (high government spending for World War II is often credited with bringing the USA out of the Great Depression by most Keynesian economists) but in many cases, such as the wars of Louis XIV, the Franco-Prussian War, and World War I, warfare serves only to damage the economy of the countries involved. For example, Russia's involvement in World War I took such a toll on the Russian economy that it almost collapsed and greatly contributed to the start of the Russian Revolution of 1917. World War II One of the starkest illustrations of the effect of war upon economies is the Second World War. The Great Depression of the 1930s ended as nations increased their production of war materials to serve the war effort.[58] The financial cost of World War II is estimated at about a trillion U.S. dollars worldwide, making it the most costly war in capital as well as lives.[59][60] By the end of the war, the European economy had collapsed with 70% of the industrial infrastructure destroyed.[61] Property damage in the Soviet Union inflicted by the Axis invasion was estimated at a value of 679 billion rubles. The combined damage consisted of complete or partial destruction of 1,710 cities and towns, 70,000 villages/hamlets, 2,508 church buildings, 31,850 industrial establishments, 40,000 mi (64,374 km) of railroad, 4100 railroad stations, 40,000 hospitals, 84,000 schools, and 43,000 public libraries.[62] On the arts War leads to forced migration causing potentially large displacements of population. Among forced migrants there are usually relatively large shares of artists and other types of creative people, causing so the war effects to be particularly harmful for the country’s creative potential in the long-run.[63] War is further argued to have a direct impact on artistic output, as it disrupts the production processes and distribution of artworks. Since creativity in the arts is often an expression of intense feeling, and as war affects the frame of mind of an artist, it has a negative effect on an artists’ individual life-cycle output.[64] It is not uncommon that during Wars, cultural institutions, such as libraries, are seen as “targets in themselves; their elimination was a way to denigrate and demoralize the enemy population.” It is important to know about and understand the impact such destruction can have on a society because “in an era in which competing ideologies fuel internal and international conflict, the destruction of libraries and other items of cultural significance is neither random nor irrelevant. Preserving the world’s repositories of knowledge is crucial to ensuring that the darkest moments of history do not endlessly repeat themselves.”[65] Aims Entities deliberately contemplating going to war and entities considering whether to end a war may formulate war aims as an evaluation/propaganda tool. War aims may stand as a proxy for national-military resolve.[66] Definition Fried defines war aims as "the desired territorial, economic, military or other benefits expected following successful conclusion of a war".[67] Classification Tangible/intangible aims: Tangible war aims may involve (for example) the acquisition of territory (as in the German goal of Lebensraum in the first half of the 20th century) or the recognition of economic concessions (as in the Anglo-Dutch Wars). Intangible war aims - like the accumulation of credibility or reputation[68] - may have more tangible expression ("conquest restores prestige, annexation increases power").[69] Explicit/implicit aims: Explicit war aims may involve published policy decisions. Implicit war aims[70] can take the form of minutes of discussion, memoranda and instructions.[71] Positive/negative aims: "Positive war aims" cover tangible outcomes. "Negative war aims" forestall or prevent undesired outcomes.[72] War aims can change in the course of conflict and may eventually morph into "peace conditions"[73] - the minimal conditions under which a state may cease to wage a particular war. Ongoing conflicts Main article: List of ongoing military conflicts There are currently dozens of ongoing armed conflicts around the world, the deadliest of which is the Syrian Civil War. Limiting and stopping Main article: Anti-war movement See also: Aestheticization of violence Execution at Verdun at the time of the mutinies of 1917, when parts of the French Army refused to conduct further offensive operations Religious groups have long formally opposed or sought to limit war as in the Second Vatican Council document Gaudiem et Spes: "Any act of war aimed indiscriminately at the destruction of entire cities of extensive areas along with their population is a crime against God and man himself. It merits unequivocal and unhesitating condemnation."[74] Anti-war movements have existed for every major war in the 20th century, including, most prominently, World War I, World War II, and the Vietnam War. In the 21st century, worldwide anti-war movements occurred ever since the United States invaded Afghanistan and Iraq. In 2001, the U.S. government decided to invade Afghanistan to fight against international terrorism that caused the September 11 attacks. Protests opposing the War in Afghanistan occurred in cities in Europe, Asia, and all over the United States. Organizations like Stop the War Coalition, based in the United Kingdom, work on campaigning against the war. They raise awareness of the war, organize demonstrations, and lobby the governments.[75] Significant worldwide opposition to the Iraq War also exists. Critics oppose the war based on the argument of violation of sovereignty, absence of the UN approval, and perceived illegitimacy. The Mexican Drug War, with estimated casualties of 40,000 since December 2006, has been recently facing a fundamental opposition.[76] In 2011, the movement for peace and justice has started a popular middle-class movement against the war. It has won the recognition of President Calderon, who started the war, but has not ended it.[77] Governments also use the method of disarmament to stop and prevent the cost of war. Theories for motivation The Ottoman campaign for territorial expansion in Europe in 1566, Crimean Tatars as vanguard. The Tatars essentially sought booty, especially slaves. There is no scholarly agreement on which are the most common motivations for war.[78] Motivations may be different for those ordering the war than for those undertaking the war. For example, in the Third Punic War, Rome's leaders may have wished to make war with Carthage for the purpose of eliminating a resurgent rival, while the individual soldiers may have been motivated by a wish to make money. Since many people are involved, a war may acquire a life of its own from the confluence of many different motivations. An interpretation of the ancient Jewish commentary (BeReshit Rabbah) on the fight between Cain and Abel in Genesis 4 (Parashot BeReshit XXII:7) states that there are three universal reasons for wars: (A) Economics, (B) Power, and (C) Religion.[79] As the strategic and tactical aspects of warfare are always changing, theories and doctrines relating to warfare are often reformulated before, during, and after every major war. Carl von Clausewitz said, 'Every age had its own kind of war, its own limiting conditions, and its own peculiar preconceptions.'[80] The one constant factor is war’s employment of organized violence and the resultant destruction of property and/or lives that necessarily follows. Psychoanalytic psychology Dutch psychoanalyst Joost Meerloo held that, "War is often...a mass discharge of accumulated internal rage (where)...the inner fears of mankind are discharged in mass destruction."[81] Thus war can sometimes be a means by which man's own frustration at his inability to master his own self is expressed and temporarily relieved via his unleashing of destructive behavior upon others. In this destructive scenario, these others are made to serve as the scapegoat of man's own unspoken and subconscious frustrations and fears. Other psychoanalysts such as E.F.M. Durban and John Bowlby have argued that human beings are inherently violent.[82] This aggressiveness is fueled by displacement and projection where a person transfers his or her grievances into bias and hatred against other races, religions, nations or ideologies. By this theory, the nation state preserves order in the local society while creating an outlet for aggression through warfare. If war is innate to human nature, as is presupposed and predetermined by many psychological theories, then there is little hope of ever escaping it. The Italian psychoanalyst Franco Fornari, a follower of Melanie Klein, thought that war was the paranoid or projective “elaboration” of mourning.[83] Fornari thought that war and violence develop out of our “love need”: our wish to preserve and defend the sacred object to which we are attached, namely our early mother and our fusion with her. For the adult, nations are the sacred objects that generate warfare. Fornari focused upon sacrifice as the essence of war: the astonishing willingness of human beings to die for their country, to give over their bodies to their nation. Despite Fornari's theory that man's altruistic desire for self-sacrifice for a noble cause is a contributing factor towards war, in history only a tiny fraction of wars have originated from a desire for war from the general populace.[84] Far more often the general population has been reluctantly drawn into war by its rulers. One psychological theory that looks at the leaders is advanced by Maurice Walsh.[85] He argues that the general populace is more neutral towards war and that wars only occur when leaders with a psychologically abnormal disregard for human life are placed into power. War is caused by leaders that seek war such as Napoleon and Hitler. Such leaders most often come to power in times of crisis when the populace opts for a decisive leader, who then leads the nation to war. Naturally, the common people don't want war; neither in Russia nor in England nor in America, nor for that matter in Germany. That is understood. But, after all, it is the leaders of the country who determine the policy and it is always a simple matter to drag the people along, whether it is a democracy or a fascist dictatorship or a Parliament or a Communist dictatorship. ... the people can always be brought to the bidding of the leaders. That is easy. All you have to do is tell them they are being attacked and denounce the pacifists for lack of patriotism and exposing the country to danger. It works the same way in any country. — Hermann Göring at the Nuremberg trials, April 18, 1946[86] Evolutionary This section's factual accuracy is disputed. (October 2011) See also: Prehistoric warfare Increasing population and constant warfare among the Maya city-states over resources may have contributed to the eventual collapse of the Maya civilization by AD 900. Women and priests retrieve the dead bodies of Swabian soldiers just outside the city gates of Constance after the battle of Schwaderloh. (Luzerner Schilling) Several theories concern the evolutionary origins of warfare. There are two main schools: One sees organized warfare as emerging only in or after the Mesolithic as a result of complex social organization and greater population density and competition over resources; the other school sees human warfare as a more ancient practice that derives from common animal tendencies, such as territoriality and sexual competition.[87] The latter school argues that since warlike behavior patterns are found in many primate species such as chimpanzees,[88] as well as in many ant species,[89] group conflict may be a general feature of animal social behavior. Some proponents of the idea argue that war, while innate, has been intensified greatly by developments of technology and social organization such as weaponry and states.[90] In The Blank Slate, psychologist and linguist Steven Pinker claims that war-related behaviors may have been naturally selected in the ancestral environment due to the benefits of winning wars, e.g. gaining territory and women. He also argues that in order to have credible deterrence against other groups (as well as on an individual level), it was important to have a reputation for retaliation, causing humans to develop instincts for revenge as well as for protecting a group's (or an individual's) reputation ("honor"). In The Better Angels of Our Nature Pinker argues that the development of the state and the police have dramatically reduced the level of warfare and violence in comparison to the ancestral environment. Whenever the state is not present, he says, such as in poor areas of a city, humans again organize in groups for protection and aggression and concepts such as violent revenge and protecting honor again become extremely important. Crofoot and Wrangham have argued that warfare, if defined as group interactions in which "coalitions attempt to aggressively dominate or kill members of other groups", is a characteristic of most human societies. Those in which it has been lacking "tend to be societies that were politically dominated by their neighbors".[91] Ashley Montagu strongly denied universalistic instinctual arguments, arguing that social factors and childhood socialization are important in determining the nature and presence of warfare. Thus, he argues, warfare is not a universal human occurrence and appears to have been a historical invention, associated with certain types of human societies.[92] Montagu's argument is supported by ethnographic research conducted in societies where the concept of aggression seems to be entirely absent, e.g. the Chewong and Semai of the Malay peninsula.[93] Bobbi S. Low has observed correlation between warfare and education, noting that societies where warfare is commonplace encourage their children to be more aggressive.[94] Economic Kuwaiti oil wells on fire, during the Gulf War, 1 March 1991 War can be seen as a growth of economic competition in a competitive international system. In this view wars begin as a pursuit of markets for natural resources and for wealth. War has also been linked to economic development by economic historians and development economists studying state-building and fiscal capacity.[95] While this theory has been applied to many conflicts, such counter arguments become less valid as the increasing mobility of capital and information level the distributions of wealth worldwide, or when considering that it is relative, not absolute, wealth differences that may fuel wars. There are those on the extreme right of the political spectrum who provide support, fascists in particular, by asserting a natural right of a strong nation to whatever the weak cannot hold by force.[96][97] Some centrist, capitalist, world leaders, including Presidents of the United States and U.S. Generals, expressed support for an economic view of war. Marxist The Marxist theory of war is quasi-economic in that it states that all modern wars are caused by competition for resources and markets between great (imperialist) powers, claiming these wars are a natural result of the free market and class system. Part of the theory is that war will only disappear once a world revolution, over-throwing free markets and class systems, has occurred. Marxist philosopher Rosa Luxemburg theorized that imperialism was the result of capitalist countries needing new markets. Expansion of the means of production is only possible if there is a corresponding growth in consumer demand. Since the workers in a capitalist economy would be unable to fill the demand, producers must expand into non-capitalist markets to find consumers for their goods, hence driving imperialism.[98] Demographic Demographic theories can be grouped into two classes, Malthusian theories and youth bulge theories. Malthusian U.S. Marine helicopter on patrol in Somalia as part of the Unified Task Force, 1992 Malthusian theories see expanding population and scarce resources as a source of violent conflict. Pope Urban II in 1095, on the eve of the First Crusade, spoke: For this land which you now inhabit, shut in on all sides by the sea and the mountain peaks, is too narrow for your large population; it scarcely furnishes food enough for its cultivators. Hence it is that you murder and devour one another, that you wage wars, and that many among you perish in civil strife. Let hatred, therefore, depart from among you; let your quarrels end. Enter upon the road to the Holy Sepulchre; wrest that land from a wicked race, and subject it to yourselves.[99] This is one of the earliest expressions of what has come to be called the Malthusian theory of war, in which wars are caused by expanding populations and limited resources. Thomas Malthus (1766–1834) wrote that populations always increase until they are limited by war, disease, or famine.[100] This theory is thought by Malthusians to account for the relative decrease in wars during the past fifty years, especially in the developed world, where advances in agriculture have made it possible to support a much larger population than was formerly the case, and where birth control has dramatically slowed the increase in population. Youth bulge Median age by country. A youth bulge is evident for Africa, and to a lesser extent for South and Southeast Asia and Central America. Youth bulge theory differs significantly from Malthusian theories. Its adherents see a combination of large male youth cohorts – as graphically represented as a "youth bulge" in a population pyramid – with a lack of regular, peaceful employment opportunities as a risk pool for violence. While Malthusian theories focus on a disparity between a growing population and available natural resources, youth bulge theory focuses on a disparity between non-inheriting, 'excess' young males and available social positions within the existing social system of division of labour. Young males who cannot find acceptable positions within the existing system of division of labour and thus become "socially superfluous" are, according to youth bulge theory, prone to become violent in one form or another. This implies that in a situation where a youth bulge is given, a major economic depression with massively increasing unemployment will likely lead to outbreaks of violence (as, for example, evidenced in Europe during the great depression, when fascist organizations mobilized a lot of male youth to march the streets). Contributors to the development of youth bulge theory include French sociologist Gaston Bouthoul,[101] U.S. sociologist Jack A. Goldstone,[102] U.S. political scientist Gary Fuller,[103][104][105] and German sociologist Gunnar Heinsohn.[106] Samuel Huntington has modified his Clash of Civilizations theory by using youth bulge theory as its foundation: I don't think Islam is any more violent than any other religions, and I suspect if you added it all up, more people have been slaughtered by Christians over the centuries than by Muslims. But the key factor is the demographic factor. Generally speaking, the people who go out and kill other people are males between the ages of 16 and 30. During the 1960s, 70s and 80s there were high birth rates in the Muslim world, and this has given rise to a huge youth bulge. But the bulge will fade. Muslim birth rates are going down; in fact, they have dropped dramatically in some countries. Islam did spread by the sword originally, but I don't think there is anything inherently violent in Muslim theology.[107] Youth Bulge theories represent a relatively recent development but seem to have become more influential in guiding U.S. foreign policy and military strategy as both Goldstone and Fuller have acted as consultants to the U.S. Government. CIA Inspector General John L. Helgerson referred to youth bulge theory in his 2002 report "The National Security Implications of Global Demographic Change".[108] Palestinian militant with an M16 rifle, 2009 According to Heinsohn, who has proposed youth bulge theory in its most generalized form, a youth bulge occurs when 30 to 40 percent of the males of a nation belong to the "fighting age" cohorts from 15 to 29 years of age. It will follow periods with total fertility rates as high as 4–8 children per woman with a 15–29-year delay. A total fertility rate of 2.1 children born by a woman during her lifetime represents a situation in which the son will replace the father, and the daughter will replace the mother, accounting for a small proportion of deaths to factors such as illness and accidents. Thus, a total fertility rate of 2.1 represents replacement level, while anything below represents a sub-replacement fertility rate leading to population decline. Total fertility rates above 2.1 will lead to population growth and to a youth bulge. A total fertility rate of 4–8 children per mother implies 2–4 sons per mother. Consequently, one father has to leave not 1, but 2 to 4 social positions (jobs) to give all his sons a perspective for life, which is usually hard to achieve. Since respectable positions cannot be increased at the same speed as food, textbooks and vaccines, many "angry young men" find themselves in a situation that tends to escalate their adolescent anger into violence: they are Demographically superfluous, Might be out of work or stuck in a menial job, and Often have no access to a legal sex life before a career can earn them enough to provide for a family. See: Hypergamy, Waithood. The combination of these stress factors according to Heinsohn[109] usually heads for one of six different exits: Mexican soldiers detain cartel suspects in Michoacán, 2007 Emigration ("non-violent colonization") Violent crime Rebellion or putsch Civil war and/or revolution Genocide (to take over the possessions of the slaughtered) Conquest (violent colonization, frequently including genocide abroad). Religions and ideologies are seen as secondary factors that are being used to legitimate violence, but will not lead to violence by themselves if no youth bulge is present. Consequently, youth bulge theorists see both past "Christianist" European colonialism and imperialism and today's "Islamist" civil unrest and terrorism as results of high birth rates producing youth bulges[110] – with the Israeli-occupied Gaza Strip now being seen as another example of youth-bulge-driven violence. Among prominent historical events that have been linked to the existence of youth bulges is the role played by the historically large youth cohorts in the rebellion and revolution waves of early modern Europe, including the French Revolution of 1789,[111] and the importance of economic depression hitting the largest German youth cohorts ever in explaining the rise of Nazism in Germany in the 1930s.[112] The 1994 Rwandan Genocide has also been analyzed as following a massive youth bulge.[113] While the implications of population growth have been known since the completion of the National Security Study Memorandum 200 in 1974,[114] neither the U.S. nor the WHO have implemented the recommended measures to control population growth to avert the terrorist threat. Prominent demographer Stephen D. Mumford attributes this to the influence of the Catholic Church.[115] Youth Bulge theory has been subjected to statistical analysis by the World Bank,[116] Population Action International,[117] and the Berlin Institute for Population and Development.[118] Detailed demographic data for most countries is available at the international database of the United States Census Bureau.[119] Statistic data about historical development of demographic and economic parameters over the last 200 years for each country can be visualized at Gapminder.[120] Youth bulge theories have been criticized as leading to racial, gender and age "discrimination".[121] Rationalist U.S. soldiers directing artillery on enemy trucks in A Shau Valley, April 1968. Rationalism is an international relations theory or framework. Rationalism (and Neorealism (international relations)) operate under the assumption that states or international actors are rational, seek the best possible outcomes for themselves, and desire to avoid the costs of war.[122] Under a Game theory approach, rationalist theories posit that all actors can bargain, would be better off if war did not occur, and likewise seek to understand why war nonetheless reoccurs. In "Rationalist Explanations for War", James Fearon seeks to answer this puzzle by examining three rationalist explanations for why some some countries cannot find a bargain and instead resort to war: Issue Indivisibilities Incentives to Misrepresent or Information Asymmetry Commitment Problems[122] "Issue indivisibility" occurs when the two parties cannot avoid war by bargaining because the thing over which they are fighting cannot be shared between them, only owned entirely by one side or the other. Religious issues, such as control over the Temple Mount in Jerusalem, are more likely to be indivisible than economic issues. "Information asymmetry with incentives to misrepresent" occurs when two countries have secrets about their individual capabilities, and do not agree on either: who would win a war between them, or the magnitude of state's victory or loss. For instance, Geoffrey Blainey argues that war is a result of miscalculation of strength. He cites historical examples of war and demonstrates, "war is usually the outcome of a diplomatic crisis which cannot be solved because both sides have conflicting estimates of their bargaining power."[123] States will not avoid the bargaining failure by sharing their secrets, since they cannot trust each other not to lie and exaggerate their strength to extract more concessions. For example, Sweden made efforts to deceive Nazi Germany that it would resist an attack fiercely, partly by playing on the myth of Aryan superiority and by making sure that Hermann Göring only saw elite troops in action, often dressed up as regular soldiers, when he came to visit. Another example is the American decision to enter the Vietnam War. This decision was made with the full knowledge that the communist forces would resist them, but without the belief that the guerrillas had the capability to oppose American forces for long. U.S. Marines direct a concentration of fire at the enemy, Vietnam, 8 May 1968 Thirdly, bargaining may fail due to the states' inability to make credible commitments.[124] In this scenario, the two countries might be able to come to a bargain that would avert war if they could stick to it, but the benefits of the bargain will make one side more powerful and lead it to demand even more in the future, so that the weaker side has an incentive to make a stand now. Within the rationalist tradition, some theorists have suggested individuals engaged in war suffer a normal level of cognitive bias,[125] but are still "as rational as you and me".[126] According to philosopher Iain King, "Most instigators of conflict overrate their chances of success, while most participants underrate their chances of injury...."[127] King asserts that "Most catastrophic military decisions are rooted in GroupThink" which is faulty, but still rational.[128] Rationalist explanations of war can be critiqued on a number of grounds. The assumptions of cost-benefit calculations become dubious in the most extreme genocidal cases of World War II, where the only bargain offered in some cases was infinitely bad. Rationalist theories typically assume that the state acts as a unitary individual, doing what is best for the state as a whole; this is problematic when, for example, the country's leader is beholden to a very small number of people, as in a personalistic dictatorship. The rationalist theory focused around bargaining is currently under debate. The Iraq War proved to be an anomaly that undercuts the validity of applying rationalist theory to some wars.[129] Political science The statistical analysis of war was pioneered by Lewis Fry Richardson following World War I. More recent databases of wars and armed conflict have been assembled by the Correlates of War Project, Peter Brecke and the Uppsala Conflict Data Program. The following subsections consider causes of war from system, societal, and individual levels of analysis. This kind of division was first proposed by Kenneth Waltz in Man, the State, and War (1959) and has been often used by political scientists since then.[130]:143 System-level theories There are several different international relations theory schools. Supporters of realism in international relations argue that the motivation of states is the quest for security, and conflicts can arise from the inability to distinguish defense from offense, which is called the security dilemma.[130]:145 Within the realist school as represented by scholars such as Henry Kissinger and Hans Morgenthau, and the neorealist school represented by scholars such as Kenneth Waltz and John Mearsheimer, two main sub-theories are Balance of power theory: States have the goal of preventing a single state from becoming a hegemon. Wars result if the would-be hegemon doesn't back down from trying to acquire power. According to this view, an international system with more equal distribution of power is more stable, and "movements toward unipolarity are destabilizing."[130]:147 However, evidence has shown that power polarity is not actually a major factor in the occurrence of wars.[130]:147–148 Power transition theory: Hegemons take control and impose stabilizing conditions on the world order, but they eventually decline, and wars occur when a declining hegemon either is challenged by another rising power or aims to preemptively suppress the new rising power.[130]:148 On this view, unlike for balance-of-power theory, wars become more probable when power is more equally distributed. This "power preponderance" hypothesis has empirical support.[130]:148 While these two theories appear to contradict each other, they could both be correct depending on the system. For instance, balance-of-power theory might better describe Europe's history, while power-transition theory might better describe the world overall.[130]:148 Liberals in international relations cite other factors as relevant to conflicts, such as trade. If two countries have a profitable trading relationship, it's assumed that war would hurt both of them economically, making it less attractive. Realists respond that military force may sometimes be at least as effective as trade at achieving economic benefits, especially historically if not as much today.[130]:149 Also, trade can create dependence that allows for coercion, which can escalate conflict.[130]:150 Empirical data on the relationship of trade to peace are mixed, and moreover, some evidence suggests that countries at war don't necessarily trade less with each other.[130]:150 Societal-level theories Diversionary theory, also known as the "scapegoat hypothesis", suggests that politicians may use war to distract or rally together domestic popular support.[130]:152 This idea is supported by literature showing that outgroup hostility enhances ingroup bonding, and a significant domestic "rally effect" has been demonstrated when conflicts begin.[130]:152–153 However, studies looking for increased use of force as a function of need for internal political support are more mixed.[130]:152–153 U.S. war-time presidential popularity surveys taken during the presidencies of several recent U.S. leaders have supported diversionary theory.[131] Democratic peace theory suggests that democracies are less likely to go to war with each other. Individual-level theories These theories suggest that differences in people's personalities, decision-making, emotions, belief systems, and biases are important in determining whether conflicts get out of hand.[130]:157 For instance, it has been proposed that conflict is modulated by bounded rationality and various cognitive biases,[130]:157 such as prospect theory.[132] Other relevant factors can include ethic, moral, and religious differences, including declarations of independence by certain groups. Ethics Morning after the Battle of Waterloo, by John Heaviside Clark, 1816 The seeming contradiction between warfare and morality has led to serious moral questions, which have been the subject of debate for thousands of years.[133] The debate in the West, generally speaking, has two main viewpoints: Pacifists, who believe that war is inherently immoral and therefore is never justified regardless of circumstances, and those who believe that war is sometimes necessary and can be moral. There are two different aspects to ethics in war, according to the most prominent and influential thought on justice and war: the Just War Theory.[134][135] First is jus ad bellum (literally translated as "right to war"), which dictates which unfriendly acts and circumstances justify a proper authority in declaring war on another nation. There are six main criteria for the declaration of a just war: first, any just war must be declared by a lawful authority; second, it must be a just and righteous cause, with sufficient gravity to merit large-scale violence; third, the just belligerent must have rightful intentions – namely, that they seek to advance good and curtail evil; fourth, a just belligerent must have a reasonable chance of success; fifth, the war must be a last resort; and sixth, the ends being sought must be proportional to means being used.[136][137] Once a just war has been declared, the second standard, or aspect, is put into effect. Jus in bello, which literally translates to "right in war", are the ethical rules of conduct when conducting war. The two main principles in jus in bello are proportionality and discrimination. Proportionality regards how much force is necessary and morally appropriate to the ends being sought and the injustice suffered.[138] The principle of discrimination determines who are the legitimate targets in a war, and specifically makes a separation between combatants, who it is permissible to kill, and non-combatants, who it is not.[138] Failure to follow these rules can result in the loss of legitimacy for the just war belligerent, and so thereby forfeit the moral right and justice of their cause.[135] In besieged Leningrad. "Hitler ordered that Moscow and Leningrad were to be razed to the ground; their inhabitants were to be annihilated or driven out by starvation. These intentions were part of the 'General Plan East'." – The Oxford Companion to World War II.[139] The Just War standard is as old as Western Civilization itself, and still has significant impact on thinking about the morality of wars and violence today.[140] Just War Theory was foundational in the creation of the United Nations and in International Law's regulations on legitimate war.[133] These two positions generally cover the broad philosophical and ethical bents of mainstream society. However, there are several theories on and about war which are in the minority in culture, but which, because of the influence they have had in recent history, demand mention here. These strains of thought on human society and war can be broken up into two main camps: Marxist and Fascist, both of which view war as purely practical. Marxism, and other such historicist ideals, hold that history advances through a set of dialectics (as stated by Heinrich Moritz Chalybäus: thesis, antithesis, synthesis). Marx, and his followers, in particular held that history advances through violence. Marxism–Leninism, in fact, held the belief that outright incitement to violence and war was necessary to topple capitalism and free the proletariat. In these theories, the question of ethics has no place, as the value of the war is entirely dependent on whether it advances the revolution or synthesis. Fascism, and the ideals it encompasses, such as Pragmatism, racism, and social Darwinism, hold that violence is good.[141][142] Pragmatism holds that war and violence can be good if it serves the ends of the people, without regard for universal morality. Racism holds that violence is good so that a master race can be established, or to purge an inferior race from the earth, or both. Social Darwinism thinks that violence is sometimes necessary to weed the unfit from society so that civilization can flourish. These are broad archetypes for the general position that the ends justify the means. Social Darwinism as elaborated by the late U.S. sociologist and social evolutionist, William Sumner, states competition, conflict, inequality, and hierarchy is natural and good as it allows able-bodied and intelligent individuals and societies to lead and prosper. Lewis Coser, U.S. conflict theorist and sociologist, argued that conflict provides a function and a process whereby a succession of new equilibriums are created. Thus, the struggle of opposing forces, rather than being disruptive, may indeed be a means of balancing and maintaining a social structure or society.[143] See also War portal Book: War Outline of war General reference Breakaway states Casus belli Colonial war Fault line war Nuclear war Religious war Undeclared war War as metaphor War-related lists List of battles List of battles and other violent events by death toll List of battles by death toll List of invasions List of ongoing conflicts List of orders of battle List of terrorist incidents Lists of wars List of war crimes List of wars and anthropogenic disasters by death toll List of wars by death toll References ^ Šmihula, Daniel (2013): The Use of Force in International Relations, p. 67, ISBN 978-80-224-1341-1. ^ James, Paul; Friedman, Jonathan (2006). Globalization and Violence, Vol. 3: Globalizing War and Intervention. London: Sage Publications.  ^ GBD 2013 Mortality and Causes of Death, Collaborators (17 December 2014). "Global, regional, and national age-sex specific all-cause and cause-specific mortality for 240 causes of death, 1990-2013: a systematic analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study 2013.". Lancet 385: 117–71. doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(14)61682-2. PMC 4340604. PMID 25530442.  ^ *The Cambridge History of China: Alien regimes and border states, 907–1368, 1994, p.622, cited by White *Matthew White (2011-11-07). The Great Big Book of Horrible Things: The Definitive Chronicle of History's 100 Worst Atrocities. ^ Mongol Conquests ^ "Top Ten Problems of Humanity for Next 50 Years", Professor R. E. Smalley, Energy & NanoTechnology Conference, Rice University, May 3, 2003. ^ Tanton, John (2002). The Social Contract. p. 42.  ^ Moore, John (1992). The pursuit of happiness. p. 304.  ^ Baxter, Richard (2013). Humanizing the Laws of War. p. 344.  ^ Dying and Death: Inter-disciplinary Perspectives - Page 153, Asa Kasher - 2007 ^ Chew, Emry (2012). Arming the Periphery. p. 49.  ^ "war". Online Etymology Dictionary. 2010. Retrieved 24 April 2011.  ^ Diccionario de la Lengua Española, 21a edición (1992) p. 1071 ^ D. Hank Ellison (August 24, 2007). Handbook of Chemical and Biological Warfare Agents, Second Edition. CRC Press. pp. 567–570. ISBN 0-8493-1434-8.  ^ Peters, Ralph. New Glory: Expanding America's Global Supremacy, 2005. p. 30 ^ a b c d e Lt. Col. Dave Grossman (1996). On Killing – The Psychological Cost of Learning to Kill in War & Society. Little, Brown & Co.,.  ^ Axelrod, Robert. 1984. The Evolution of Cooperation. New York: Basic Books. ^ Waller, James. Becoming Evil: How Ordinary People Commit Genocide and Mass Killing.  ^ Keeley, Lawrence H: War Before Civilization: The Myth of the Peaceful Savage. Page 37. ^ Diamond, Jared, Guns, Germs and Steel ^ Conway W. Henderson (9 February 2010). Understanding International Law. John Wiley & Sons. pp. 212–. ISBN 978-1-4051-9764-9. Retrieved 31 May 2012.  ^ "Review: War Before Civilization". Brneurosci.org. 4 September 2006. Retrieved 2011-01-24.  ^ Spengler (4 July 2006). "The fraud of primitive authenticity". Asia Times Online. Retrieved 2009-06-08.  ^ Martin, Debra L., Ryan P. Harrod, and Ventura R. Pérez, eds. 2012. The Bioarchaeology of Violence. Gainesville: University Press of Florida. http://www.upf.com/book.asp?id=MARTI002 ^ Keeley, Lawrence H: War Before Civilization: The Myth of the Peaceful Savage. Page 55. ^ W. D. Rubinstein (2004). Genocide: A History. Pearson Longman. pp. 22–50. ISBN 978-0-582-50601-5. Retrieved 31 May 2012.  ^ Thornton, Russell (1990). American Indian Holocaust and Survival: A Population History since 1492. University of Oklahoma Press. p. 48. ISBN 978-0-8061-2220-5 ^ a b c World War One – A New Kind of War | Part II, From 14 – 18 Understanding the Great War, by Stéphane Audoin-Rouzeau, Annette Becker ^ Kolko 1994, p. xvii–xviii: "War in this century became an essential precondition for the emergence of a numerically powerful Left, moving it from the margins to the very center of European politics during 1917–18 and of all world affairs after 1941". ^ "Albert Einstein: Man of Imagination". 1947. Archived from the original on 4 June 2010. Retrieved 2010-02-03.  Nuclear Age Peace Foundation paper ^ "Instant Wisdom: Beyond the Little Red Book". Time. 20 September 1976. Retrieved 14 April 2013.  ^ Hewitt, Joseph, J. Wilkenfield and T. Gurr Peace and Conflict 2008, Paradigm Publishers, 2007 ^ a b McFarlane, Alan: The Savage Wars of Peace: England, Japan and the Malthusian Trap, Blackwell 2003, ISBN 0-631-18117-2, ISBN 978-0-631-18117-0 – cited by White ^ Wallinsky, David: David Wallechinsky's Twentieth Century: History With the Boring Parts Left Out, Little Brown & Co., 1996, ISBN 0-316-92056-8, ISBN 978-0-316-92056-8 – cited by White ^ Brzezinski, Zbigniew: Out of Control: Global Turmoil on the Eve of the Twenty-first Century, Prentice Hall & IBD, 1994, ASIN B000O8PVJI – cited by White ^ Ping-ti Ho, "An Estimate of the Total Population of Sung-Chin China", in Études Song, Series 1, No 1, (1970) pp. 33–53. ^ "Mongol Conquests". Users.erols.com. Retrieved 2011-01-24.  ^ "The world's worst massacres Whole Earth Review". Findarticles.com. 1987. Retrieved 2011-01-24.  ^ "Taiping Rebellion – Britannica Concise". Britannica. Retrieved 2011-01-24.  ^ Michael Duffy (22 August 2009). "Military Casualties of World War One". Firstworldwar.com. Retrieved 2011-01-24.  ^ "Selected Death Tolls for Wars, Massacres and Atrocities Before the 20th Century". Users.erols.com. Retrieved 2011-01-24.  ^ "Nuclear Power: The End of the War Against Japan". BBC News. Retrieved 2011-01-24.  ^ "Timur Lenk (1369–1405)". Users.erols.com. Retrieved 2011-01-24.  ^ Matthew White's website (a compilation of scholarly death toll estimates) ^ "Russian Civil War". Spartacus.schoolnet.co.uk. Archived from the original on 5 December 2010. Retrieved 2011-01-24.  ^ "Mortality and Burden of Disease Estimates for WHO Member States in 2004". World Health Organization.  ^ Maris Vinovskis (28 September 1990). Toward a Social History of the American Civil War: Exploratory Essays. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-39559-5. Retrieved 31 May 2012.  ^ Kitchen, Martin (2000), The Treaty of Versailles and its Consequences, New York: Longman ^ The Historical Impact of Epidemic Typhus. Joseph M. Conlon. ^ War and Pestilence. TIME. ^ A. S. Turberville (2006). Johnson's England: An Account of the Life & Manners of His Age. ISBN READ BOOKS. p.53. ISBN 1-4067-2726-1 ^ Obermeyer Z, Murray CJ, Gakidou E (June 2008). "Fifty years of violent war deaths from Vietnam to Bosnia: analysis of data from the world health survey programme". BMJ 336 (7659): 1482–6. doi:10.1136/bmj.a137. PMC 2440905. PMID 18566045.  CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list (link) ^ The Thirty Years War (1618–48), Alan McFarlane, The Savage Wars of Peace: England, Japan and the Malthusian Trap (2003) ^ History of Europe – Demographics. Encyclopædia Britannica. ^ "World War II Fatalities". Retrieved 2007-04-20.  ^ "Leaders mourn Soviet wartime dead". BBC News. 9 May 2005. Retrieved 6 January 2010.  ^ Hosking, Geoffrey A. (2006). Rulers And Victims: The Russians in the Soviet Union. Harvard University Press. pp. 242–. ISBN 978-0-674-02178-5. Retrieved 31 May 2012.  ^ "Great Depression and World War II, 1929–1945". Library of Congress. Archived from the original on 12 October 2007. Retrieved 4 July 2014.  ^ Mayer, E. (2000). "World War II course lecture notes". Emayzine.com. Victorville, California: Victor Valley College. Archived from the original on 1 March 2009. Retrieved 4 July 2014.  ^ Coleman, P. (1999) "Cost of the War," World War II Resource Guide (Gardena, California: The American War Library) ^ Marc Pilisuk; Jennifer Achord Rountree (2008). Who Benefits from Global Violence and War: Uncovering a Destructive System. Greenwood Publishing Group. pp. 136–. ISBN 978-0-275-99435-8. Retrieved 31 May 2012.  ^ The New York Times, 9 February 1946, Volume 95, Number 32158. ^ Karol Jan Borowiecki, 2012. Are composers different? Historical evidence on conflict-induced migration (1816–1997). European Review of Economic History, vol.16(3), pp.270–91. <https://ideas.repec.org/p/tcd/tcduee/tep0811.html>. ^ Karol Jan Borowiecki and John O'Hagan, 2013. Impact of War on Individual Life-cycle Creativity: Tentative Evidence in Relation to Composers. Journal of Cultural Economics, vol.37, pp.347–58. <https://ideas.repec.org/p/tcd/tcduee/tep1711.html>. ^ Glenn, K. (2007). [Burning Books and Leveling Libraries]. Harvard Human Rights Journal, 203 51-353 ^ Sullivan, Patricia (2012). Who Wins?: Predicting Strategic Success and Failure in Armed Conflict. Oxford University Press, USA. p. 17. doi:10.1093/acprof:oso/9780199878338.003.0003. ISBN 9780199878338. Retrieved 2015-08-25. A state with greater military capacity than its adversary is more likely to prevail in wars with 'total' war aims—the overthrow of a foreign government or annexation of territory—than in wars with more limited objectives.  ^ Fried, Marvin Benjamin (2014). Austro-Hungarian War Aims in the Balkans During World War I. Palgrave Macmillan. p. 4. ISBN 9781137359018. Retrieved 2015-08-24. War aims are the desired territorial, economic, military or other benefits expected following successful conclusion of a war.  ^ Welch distinguishes: "tangible goods such as arms, wealth, and - provided they are strategically or economically valuable - territory and resources" from "intangible goods such as credibility and reputation" - Welch, David A. (1995). Justice and the Genesis of War. Cambridge Studies in International Relations. Cambridge University Press. p. 17. ISBN 9780521558686. Retrieved 2015-08-24.  ^ Fried, Marvin Benjamin (2014). Austro-Hungarian War Aims in the Balkans During World War I. Palgrave Macmillan. p. 4. ISBN 9781137359018. Retrieved 2015-08-24. Intangibles, such as prestige or power, can also represent war aims, though often (albeit not always) their achievent is framed within a more tangible context (e.g. conquest restores prestige, annexation increases power, etc.).  ^ Compare:Katwala, Sunder (2005-02-13). "Churchill by Paul Addison". Books. The Guardian (Guardian News and Media Limited). Retrieved 2015-08-24. [Churchill] took office and declared that he had 'not become the King's First Minister to oversee the liquidation of the British empire'. [...] His view was that an Anglo-American English-speaking alliance would seek to preserve the empire, though ending it was among Roosevelt's implicit war aims.  ^ Compare Fried, Marvin Benjamin (2014). Austro-Hungarian War Aims in the Balkans During World War I. Palgrave Macmillan. p. 4. ISBN 9781137359018. Retrieved 2015-08-24. At times, war aims were explicitly stated internally or externally in a policy decision, while at other times [...] the war aims were merely discussed but not published, remaining instead in the form of memoranda or instructions.  ^ Fried, Marvin Benjamin (2015). "'A Life and Death Question': Austro-Hungarian War Aims in the First World War". In Afflerbach, Holger. The Purpose of the First World War: War Aims and Military Strategies. Schriften des Historischen Kollegs 91. Berlin/Boston: Walter de Gruyter GmbH. p. 118. ISBN 9783110443486. Retrieved 2015-08-24. [T]he [Austrian] Foreign Ministry [...] and the Military High Command [...] were in agreement that political and military hegemony over Serbia and the Western Balkans was a vital war aim. The Hungarian Prime Minister István Count Tisza, by contrast, was more preoccupied with so-called 'negative war aims', notably warding off hostile Romanian, Italian, and even Bulgarian intervention.  ^ Haase, Hugo (1932). "The Debate in the Reichstag on Internal Political Conditions, April 5–6, 1916". In Lutz, Ralph Haswell. Fall of the German Empire, 1914-1918. Hoover War Library publications. Stanford University Press. p. 233. ISBN 9780804723800. Retrieved 2015-08-25. Gentlemen, when it comes time to formulate peace conditions, it is time to think of another thing than war aims.  ^ "PASTORAL CONSTITUTION ON THE CHURCH IN THE MODERN WORLD GAUDIUM ET SPES PROMULGATED BY HIS HOLINESS, POPE PAUL VI ON DECEMBER 7, 1965" ^ "Stop the War Coalition: Timeline of Events 2001–2011". Archived from the original on 1 January 1970.  ^ "How many have died in Mexico's drug war?".  ^ "Calderon apologises to drug war victims".  ^ Levy, Jack S. (1989). Tetlock, Philip E.; Husbands, Jo L.; Jervis, Robert; Stern, Paul C.; Tilly, Charles, eds. "The Causes of War: A Review of Theories and Evidence" (PDF). Behavior, Society and Nuclear War (New York: Oxford University Press) I: 295. Archived from the original (PDF) on 22 September 2013. Retrieved 4 May 2012.  ^ "The Conflict between Cain and Abel". 2008. Retrieved 2010-02-07.  Analysis of Midrash re: Cain & Abel ^ Clausewitz, Carl Von (1976), On War (Princeton University Press) p.593 ^ | A. M. Meerloo, M.D. The Rape of the Mind (2009) p.134, Progressive Press, ISBN 978-1-61577-376-3 ^ Durbin, E.F.L. and John Bowlby. Personal Aggressiveness and War 1939. ^ (Fornari 1975) ^ Blanning, T.C.W. "The Origin of Great Wars." The Origins of the French Revolutionary Wars. pg. 5 ^ Walsh, Maurice N. War and the Human Race. 1971. ^ "In an interview with Gilbert in Göring's jail cell during the Nuremberg War Crimes Trials (18 April 1946)". Retrieved 5 August 2015.  ^ Peter Meyer. Social Evolution in Franz M. Wuketits and Christoph Antweiler (eds.) Handbook of Evolution The Evolution of Human Societies and Cultures Wiley-VCH Verlag ^ O'Connell, Sanjida (7 January 2004). "Apes of war...is it in our genes?". The Daily Telegraph (London). Retrieved 2010-02-06.  Analysis of chimpanzee war behavior ^ "Warrior Ants: The Enduring Threat of the Small War and the Land-mine". 1996. SSRN 935783.  Scholarly comparisons between human and ant wars ^ Johan M.G. van der Dennen. 1995. The Origin of War: Evolution of a Male-Coalitional Reproductive Strategy. Origin Press, Groningen, 1995 chapters 1 & 2 ^ Mind the Gap: Tracing the Origins of Human Universals By Peter M. Kappeler, Joan B. Silk, 2009, Chapter 8, "Intergroup Aggression in Primates and Humans; The Case for a Unified Theory", Margaret C. Crofoot and Richard W. Wrangham ^ Montagu, Ashley (1976), The Nature of Human Aggression (Oxford University Press) ^ Howell, Signe and Roy Willis, eds. (1989) Societies at Peace: Anthropological Perspectives. London: Routledge ^ "An Evolutionary Perspective on War", Bobbi S. Low, published in Behavior, Culture, and Conflict in World Politics, The University of Michigan Press, p. 22 ^ Johnson, Noel D.; Koyama, Mark (2015). "States and Economic Growth: Capacity and Constraints" (PDF). George Mason University WORKING PAPER.  ^ Roger Griffin and Matthew Feldman, eds., Fascism: Fascism and Culture, New York: Routledge, 2004. ^ Hawkins, Mike. Social Darwinism in European and American Thought, 1860–1945: Nature as Model and Nature as Threat, Cambridge University Press, 1997. ^ O'Callaghan, Einde (25 October 2007). "The Marxist Theory of Imperialism and its Critics". Marxists Internet Archive. Retrieved 24 April 2011.  ^ Safire, William (2004). Lend me your ears: great speeches in history. W. W. Norton & Company. p. 94. ISBN 978-0-393-05931-1.  ^ Waugh, David (2000). Geography: an integrated approach. Nelson Thornes. p. 378. ISBN 978-0-17-444706-1.  ^ Bouthoul, Gaston: "L`infanticide différé" (deferred infanticide), Paris 1970 ^ Goldstone, Jack A.: Revolution and Rebellion in the Early Modern World, Berkeley 1991; Goldstone, Jack A.: "Population and Security: How Demographic Change can Lead to Violent Conflict", [1] ^ Fuller, Gary: "The Demographic Backdrop to Ethnic Conflict: A Geographic Overview", in: CIA (Ed.): The Challenge of Ethnic Conflict to National and International Order in the 1990s, Washington 1995, 151–154 ^ Fuller, Gary (2004). "The Youth Crisis in Middle Eastern Society" (PDF). Retrieved 2011-01-24.  ^ Fuller, Gary (2003): "The Youth Factor: The New Demographics of the Middle East and the Implications for U.S. Policy"[2] ^ Gunnar Heinsohn (2003): Söhne und Weltmacht: Terror im Aufstieg und Fall der Nationen ("Sons and Imperial Power: Terror and the Rise and Fall of Nations"), Zürich 2003), available online as free download (in German) [3]; see also the review of this book by Göran Therborn: "Nato´s Demographer", New Left Review 56, March/April 2009, 136–144 [4] ^ ‘So, are civilizations at war?’, Interview with Samuel P. Huntington by Michael Steinberger, The Observer, Sunday October 21, 2001 [5] ^ Helgerson, John L. (2002): "The National Security Implications of Global Demographic Trends"[6] ^ Heinsohn, G. (2006): "Demography and War" (online) ^ Heinsohn, G.(2005): "Population, Conquest and Terror in the 21st Century" (online) ^ Jack A. Goldstone (4 March 1993). Revolution and Rebellion in the Early Modern World. University of California Press. ISBN 978-0-520-08267-0. Retrieved 31 May 2012.  ^ Moller, Herbert (1968): ‘Youth as a Force in the Modern World’, Comparative Studies in Society and History 10: 238–260; 240–244 ^ Diessenbacher, Hartmut (1994): Kriege der Zukunft: Die Bevölkerungsexplosion gefährdet den Frieden. Muenchen: Hanser 1998; see also (criticizing youth bulge theory) Marc Sommers (2006): "Fearing Africa´s Young Men: The Case of Rwanda." The World Bank: Social Development Papers – Conflict Prevention and Reconstruction, Paper No. 32, January 2006 [7] ^ "National Security Study Memorandum 200 (NSSM 200) – April 1974". Population-security.org. Retrieved 2011-01-24.  ^ Stephen D. Mumford: The Life and Death of NSSM 200: How the Destruction of Political Will Doomed a U.S. Population Policy ^ Urdal, Henrik (2004): "The Devil in the Demographics: The Effect of Youth Bulges on Domestic Armed Conflict," [8], ^ Population Action International: "The Security Demographic: Population and Civil Conflict after the Cold War"[9] ^ Kröhnert, Steffen (2004): "Warum entstehen Kriege? Welchen Einfluss haben demografische Veränderungen auf die Entstehung von Konflikten?" [10] ^ "United States Census Bureau: International Database". Census.gov. Retrieved 2011-01-24.  ^ Gapminder World: Development of total fertility rates and income per person, 1801–2009 [11] ^ Hendrixson, Anne: "Angry Young Men, Veiled Young Women: Constructing a New Population Threat" [12] ^ a b Fearon, James D. (Summer 1995). "Rationalist Explanations for War". International Organization, Vol.49, No. 3, pp. 379-414.  ^ Geoffrey Blainey (1988). Causes of War (3rd ed.). p. 114. Retrieved 2016-03-19.  ^ Powell, Robert (2002). "Bargaining Theory and International Conflict". Annual Review of Political Science 5: 1–30.  ^ Chris Cramer, 'Civil War is Not a Stupid Thing', ISBN 978-1850658214 ^ From point 10 of Modern Conflict is Not What You Think (article), accessed 16 December 2014. ^ Quote from Iain King, in Modern Conflict is Not What You Think ^ Point 6 in Modern Conflict is Not What You Think ^ Lake, David A. (2010/11). "Two Cheers for Bargaining Theory: Assessing Rationalist Explanations of the Iraq War". International Security 35: 7–52. doi:10.1162/isec_a_00029.  Check date values in: |date= (help) ^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o Levy, Jack S. (Jun 1998). "The Causes of War and the Conditions of Peace". Annual Review of Political Science 1: 139–165. doi:10.1146/annurev.polisci.1.1.139. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2014-10-23.  ^ "Peace Economics, Peace Science and Public Policy (pg. 19)". 2001. Retrieved 2010-02-07.  Leaders may use war as instant popularity boost. More recently, empirical studies (Lebow 2008, Lindemann 2010) demonstrated that striving for self-esteem (i.e. virile self images), and recognition as a Great Power or non-recognition (exclusion and punishment of great powers, denying traumatic historical events) is a principal cause of international conflict and war. ^ Levy, Jack S. (Mar 1997). "Prospect Theory, Rational Choice, and International Relations" (PDF). International Studies Quarterly 41 (1): 87–112. doi:10.1111/0020-8833.00034.  ^ a b DeForrest, Mark Edward. "Conclusion". JUST WAR THEORY AND THE RECENT U.S. AIR STRIKES AGAINST IRAQ. Gonzaga Journal of International Law. Archived from the original on 2 April 2010. Retrieved August 1, 2011.  ^ DeForrest, Mark Edward. "GENERALLY RECOGNIZED PRINCIPLES OF JUST WAR THEORY". JUST WAR THEORY AND THE RECENT U.S. AIR STRIKES AGAINST IRAQ. Gonzaga Journal of International Law. Archived from the original on 2 April 2010. Retrieved August 1, 2011.  ^ a b Codevilla, Seabury, Angelo, Paul (1989). War: Ends and Means. New York, NY: Basic Books. p. 304. ISBN 0-465-09067-2.  ^ Aquinas, Thomas. "Part II, Question 40". The Summa Theologica. Benziger Bros. edition, 1947. Retrieved August 1, 2011.  ^ Mosley, Alexander. "The Jus Ad Bellum Convention". Just War Theory. Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Retrieved August 1, 2011.  ^ a b Moseley, Alexander. "The Principles Of Jus In Bello". Just War Theory. Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Retrieved August 1, 2011.  ^ Ian Dear, Michael Richard Daniell Foot (2001). The Oxford Companion to World War II. Oxford University Press. p.88. ISBN 0-19-860446-7 ^ Moseley, Alexander. "Introduction". Just War Theory. Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Retrieved August 1, 2011.  ^ Griffin and Feldman, eds, Roger and Matthew (2004). Fascism: Fascism and Culture. Routledge. p. 185.  ^ Woodley, Daniel (2010). Fascism and political theory critical perspectives on fascist ideology (PDF). London: Routledge. p. 276. ISBN 0-203-87157-X.  ^ Ankony, Robert C., "Sociological and Criminological Theory: Brief of Theorists, Theories, and Terms," CFM Research, Jul. 2012. Bibliography This section has an unclear citation style. The references used may be made clearer with a different or consistent style of citation, footnoting, or external linking. (December 2015) Geoffrey Blainey. The Causes of War (1973) Smedley D. Butler. War is a Racket (1935) Barzilai Gad, Wars, Internal Conflicts and Political Order: A Jewish Democracy in the Middle East (Albany: State University of New York Press, 1996). Chagnon, N. The Yanomamo, Holt, Rinehart & Winston,1983. Clausewitz, Carl Von (1976), On War (Princeton and New Jersey: Princeton University Press) Codevilla, Angelo and Seabury, Paul, War: Ends and Means (Potomac Books, Revised second edition by Angelo Codevilla, 2006) Codevilla, Angelo, No Victory, No Peace (Rowman and Littlefield, 2005) Fornari, Franco (1974). The Psychoanalysis of War. Tr. Alenka Pfeifer. Garden City, New York: Doubleday Anchor Press. Fry, Douglas. 2004. “Conclusion: Learning from Peaceful Societies.” In Keeping the Peace, Graham Kemp, editor. New York: Routledge. Fry, Douglas P., 2005, The Human Potential for Peace: An Anthropological Challenge to Assumptions about War and Violence, Oxford University Press. Fry, Douglas. 2009. Beyond War. Oxford University Press. Gat, Azar 2006 War in Human Civilization, Oxford University Press. Heinsohn, Gunnar, Söhne und Weltmacht: Terror im Aufstieg und Fall der Nationen ("Sons and Imperial Power: Terror and the Rise and Fall of Nations"), Orell Füssli (September 2003), available online as free download (in German) Howell, Signe, and Roy Willis. 1990. Societies at Peace: Anthropological Perspectives. London: Routledge. James, Paul; Friedman, Jonathan (2006). Globalization and Violence, Vol. 3: Globalizing War and Intervention. London: Sage Publications.  James, Paul; Sharma, RR (2006). Globalization and Violence, Vol. 4: Transnational Conflict. London: Sage Publications.  Keegan, John, (1994) A History of Warfare, (Pimlico) Keeley, Lawrence. War Before Civilization, Oxford University Press, 1996. Kelly, Raymond C., 2000, Warless Societies and the Origin of War, University of Michigan Press. Kemp, Graham, and Douglas Fry. 2004. Keeping the Peace. New York: Routledge. Kolko, Gabriel (1994). Century of War: Politics, Conflicts, and Society since 1914. New York, NY: The New Press. ISBN 978-1-565-84191-8.  Lebow, Richard Ned 2008, A Cultural Theory of International Relations Cambridge University Press. Lindemann, Thomas 2010, Causes of War. The Struggle for Recognition Colchester, ECPR Press Maniscalco, Fabio (2007). World heritage and war: linee guida per interventi a salvaguardia dei beni culturali nelle aree a rischio bellico. Massa. ISBN 978-88-87835-89-2. Retrieved 31 May 2012.  McIntosh, Jane. 2002. A Peaceful Realm: The Rise and Fall of the Indus Civilization. Oxford, UK: Westview Press. Metz, Steven and Philip R. Cuccia, 2011, Defining War for the 21st Century, Strategic Studies Institute, U.S. Army War College. ISBN 978-1-58487-472-0 Montagu, Ashley. 1978. Learning Nonaggression. New York: Oxford University Press. Otterbein, Keith, 2004, How War Began. College Station TX: Texas A&M University Press. Pauketat, Timothy. North American Archaeology 2005. Blackwell Publishing. Pearson, Richard. 2004. “New Perspectives on Jomon Society.” Bulletin of the International Jomon Culture Conference, Vol. 1. Small, Melvin; Singer, Joel David (1982). Resort to arms: international and civil wars, 1816–1980. Sage Publications. ISBN 978-0-8039-1776-7. Retrieved 2016-03-19.  Smith, David Livingstone (February 2009). The Most Dangerous Animal: Human Nature and the Origins of War. Macmillan. ISBN 978-0-312-53744-9.  Sponsel, Leslie, and Thomas Gregor. 1994. Anthropology of Peace and Nonviolence. Lynne Rienner Publishing. Strachan, Hew (2013), The Direction of War. Turchin, P. 2005. War and Peace and War: Life Cycles of Imperial Nations. New York, NY: Pi Press. Van Creveld, Martin The Art of War: War and Military Thought London: Cassell, Wellington House Walzer, Michael (1977) Just and Unjust Wars (Basic Books). Wade, Nicholas. Before the Dawn, Penguin: New York 2006. Zimmerman, L. The Crow Creek Site Massacre: A Preliminary Report, US Army Corps of Engineers, Omaha District, 1981. External links An Interactive map of all the battles fought around the world in the last 4,000 years Find more about War at Wikipedia's sister projects Media from Commons News stories from Wikinews Quotations from Wikiquote Source texts from Wikisource Textbooks from Wikibooks Library resources about War Online books Resources in your library War zone safety travel guide from Wikivoyage v t e War Outline Peace Warfare Wars Authority control GND: 4033114-3 NDL: 00570753 Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=War&oldid=719178800" Categories: Dispute resolution Ethics Violence War Human rights abuses Hidden categories: CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list CS1 errors: dates Wikipedia semi-protected pages Wikipedia articles needing style editing from October 2015 All articles needing style editing Use dmy dates from September 2012 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from December 2013 Articles with unsourced statements from April 2011 Accuracy disputes from October 2011 All accuracy disputes Articles using small message boxes Wikipedia references cleanup from December 2015 All articles needing references cleanup Articles covered by WikiProject Wikify from December 2015 All articles covered by WikiProject Wikify Wikipedia articles with GND identifiers Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Article Talk Variants Views Read View source View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Featured content Current events Random article Donate to Wikipedia Wikipedia store Interaction Help About Wikipedia Community portal Recent changes Contact page Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Cite this page Print/export Create a book Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Languages Afrikaans Alemannisch العربية Aragonés ܐܪܡܝܐ Armãneashti Asturianu Azərbaycanca বাংলা Bân-lâm-gú Basa Banyumasan Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца)‎ Български བོད་ཡིག Bosanski Brezhoneg Буряад Català Чӑвашла Cebuano Čeština Chamoru ChiShona Cymraeg Dansk Deitsch Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Эрзянь Español Esperanto Estremeñu Euskara فارسی Fiji Hindi Français Frysk Furlan Gaeilge Gàidhlig Galego 贛語 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ilokano Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua ᐃᓄᒃᑎᑐᑦ/inuktitut IsiXhosa Íslenska Italiano עברית Basa Jawa ಕನ್ನಡ Къарачай-малкъар ქართული Қазақша Kiswahili Коми Kongo Kreyòl ayisyen Kurdî Кыргызча ລາວ Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvių Limburgs Magyar Македонски മലയാളം मराठी مصرى Bahasa Melayu Baso Minangkabau Mìng-dĕ̤ng-ngṳ̄ Mirandés Монгол မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands Nedersaksies नेपाल भाषा 日本語 Нохчийн Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Nouormand Occitan Олык марий Oʻzbekcha/ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پنجابی پښتو Piemontèis Plattdüütsch Polski Português Ripoarisch Română Runa Simi Русиньскый Русский Саха тыла संस्कृतम् Scots Shqip Sicilianu සිංහල Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina کوردیی ناوەندی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Basa Sunda Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் Татарча/tatarça తెలుగు ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو Vèneto Vepsän kel’ Tiếng Việt Võro Walon Winaray 吴语 ייִדיש Yorùbá 粵語 Žemaitėška 中文 Edit links This page was last modified on 8 May 2016, at 03:23. Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view