Paleolithic - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Paleolithic From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to: navigation, search Paleoindians hunting a glyptodon. Glyptodons were hunted to extinction within two millennia after humans' arrival to South America. The Paleolithic This box: view talk edit ↑ Pliocene (before Homo) Lower Paleolithic (c. 3.3 Ma – 300 ka) Oldowan (2.6–1.7 Ma) Riwat (1.9–0.045 Ma) Soanian (0.5–0.13 Ma) Acheulean (1.8–0.1 Ma) Clactonian (0.3–0.2 Ma) Middle Paleolithic (300–45 ka) Mousterian (600–40 ka) Micoquien (130–70 ka) Aterian (82 ka) Upper Paleolithic (40–10 ka) Baradostian (36 ka) Châtelperronian (41–39 ka) Aurignacian (38–29 ka) Gravettian (29–22 ka) Solutrean (22–17 ka) Magdalenian (17–12 ka) Hamburg (14–11 ka) Federmesser (14–13 ka) Ahrensburg (12–11 ka) Swiderian (11–8 ka) ↓ Mesolithic ↓ Stone Age The Paleolithic (American spelling; British spelling: Palaeolithic; pronunciation: /ˌpeɪliəˈlɪθɪk, ˌpæ-, -lioʊ-/[1]) Age, Era or Period is a prehistoric period of human history distinguished by the development of the most primitive stone tools discovered (Grahame Clark's Modes I and II), and covers roughly 95%[2] of human technological prehistory. It extends from the earliest known use of stone tools, probably by Homo habilis initially, 2.6 million years ago, to the end of the Pleistocene around 10,000 BP.[3] The Paleolithic era is followed by the Mesolithic. The date of the Paleolithic–Mesolithic boundary may vary by locality as much as several thousand years. During the Paleolithic period, humans grouped together in small societies such as bands, and subsisted by gathering plants and fishing, hunting or scavenging wild animals.[4] The Paleolithic is characterized by the use of knapped stone tools, although at the time humans also used wood and bone tools. Other organic commodities were adapted for use as tools, including leather and vegetable fibers; however, due to their nature, these have not been preserved to any great degree. Surviving artifacts of the Paleolithic era are known as paleoliths. About 50,000 years ago, there was a marked increase in the diversity of artifacts. For the first time in Africa, bone artifacts and the first art appear in the archeological record. The first evidence of human fishing is also noted, from artifacts in places such as Blombos cave in South Africa. Firstly among the artifacts of Africa, archeologists found they could differentiate and classify those of less than 50,000 years into many different categories, such as projectile points, engraving tools, knife blades, and drilling and piercing tools. The new technology generated a population explosion of modern humans which is believed to have led to the extinction of the Neanderthals.[5][6] Humankind gradually evolved from early members of the genus Homo such as Homo habilis – who used simple stone tools – into fully behaviorally and anatomically modern humans (Homo sapiens) during the Paleolithic era.[7] During the end of the Paleolithic, specifically the Middle and or Upper Paleolithic, humans began to produce the earliest works of art and engage in religious and spiritual behavior such as burial and ritual.[8][9] The climate during the Paleolithic consisted of a set of glacial and interglacial periods in which the climate periodically fluctuated between warm and cool temperatures. Archaeological and genetic data suggest that the source populations of Paleolithic humans survived in sparsely wooded areas and dispersed through areas of high primary productivity while avoiding dense forest cover.[10] By 40,000-50,000 BP, first humans set foot in Australia. By 45,000 BP, humans lived at 61° north latitude in Europe.[11] By 30,000 BP, Japan was reached, and by 27,000 BP humans were present in Siberia above the Arctic Circle.[11] At the end of the Upper Paleolithic, a group of humans crossed the Bering land bridge and quickly expanded throughout North and South America. The term "Paleolithic" was coined by archaeologist John Lubbock in 1865.[12] It derives from Greek: παλαιός, palaios, "old"; and λίθος, lithos, "stone", meaning "old age of the stone" or "Old Stone Age." Contents 1 Human evolution 2 Paleogeography and climate 3 Human way of life 3.1 Distribution 3.2 Technology 3.2.1 Tools 3.2.2 Fire use 3.2.3 Rafts 3.2.4 Advanced tools 3.2.5 Other inventions 3.3 Social organization 3.4 Art and music 3.5 Religion and beliefs 3.6 Diet and nutrition 4 See also 5 References Human evolution[edit] Main article: Human evolution This section requires expansion. (November 2014) This cranium, of Homo heidelbergensis, a Lower Paleolithic predecessor to Homo neanderthalensis and possibly Homo sapiens, dates to sometime between 500,000 and 400,000 BP. Human evolution is the part of biological evolution concerning the emergence of humans as a distinct species. Paleogeography and climate[edit] Main articles: Pleistocene § Paleogeography and climate, Pliocene_climate and Pliocene § Paleogeography The Paleolithic climate consisted of a set of glacial and interglacial periods. The Paleolithic Period coincides almost exactly with the Pleistocene epoch of geologic time, which lasted from 2.6 million years ago to about 12,000 years ago.[13] This epoch experienced important geographic and climatic changes that affected human societies. During the preceding Pliocene, continents had continued to drift from possibly as far as 250 km from their present locations to positions only 70 km from their current location. South America became linked to North America through the Isthmus of Panama, bringing a nearly complete end to South America's distinctive marsupial fauna. The formation of the Isthmus had major consequences on global temperatures, because warm equatorial ocean currents were cut off, and the cold Arctic and Antarctic waters lowered temperatures in the now-isolated Atlantic Ocean. Most of Central America formed during the Pliocene to connect the continents of North and South America, allowing fauna from these continents to leave their native habitats and colonize new areas.[14] Africa's collision with Asia created the Mediterranean Sea, cutting off the remnants of the Tethys Ocean. During the Pleistocene, the modern continents were essentially at their present positions; the tectonic plates on which they sit have probably moved at most 100 km from each other since the beginning of the period.[15] Climates during the Pliocene became cooler and drier, and seasonal, similar to modern climates. Ice sheets grew on Antarctica. The formation of an Arctic ice cap around three million years ago is signaled by an abrupt shift in oxygen isotope ratios and ice-rafted cobbles in the North Atlantic and North Pacific ocean beds.[16] Mid-latitude glaciation probably began before the end of the epoch. The global cooling that occurred during the Pliocene may have spurred on the disappearance of forests and the spread of grasslands and savannas.[14] The Pleistocene climate was characterized by repeated glacial cycles during which continental glaciers pushed to the 40th parallel in some places. Four major glacial events have been identified, as well as many minor intervening events. A major event is a general glacial excursion, termed a "glacial". Glacials are separated by "interglacials". During a glacial, the glacier experiences minor advances and retreats. The minor excursion is a "stadial"; times between stadials are "interstadials". Each glacial advance tied up huge volumes of water in continental ice sheets 1500–3000 m deep, resulting in temporary sea level drops of 100 m or more over the entire surface of the Earth. During interglacial times, such as at present, drowned coastlines were common, mitigated by isostatic or other emergent motion of some regions. Many great mammals such as woolly mammoths, woolly rhinoceros, and cave lions inhabited places like Siberia during the Pleistocene. The effects of glaciation were global. Antarctica was ice-bound throughout the Pleistocene and the preceding Pliocene. The Andes were covered in the south by the Patagonian ice cap. There were glaciers in New Zealand and Tasmania. The now decaying glaciers of Mount Kenya, Mount Kilimanjaro, and the Ruwenzori Range in east and central Africa were larger. Glaciers existed in the mountains of Ethiopia and to the west in the Atlas mountains. In the northern hemisphere, many glaciers fused into one. The Cordilleran ice sheet covered the North American northwest; the Laurentide covered the east. The Fenno-Scandian ice sheet covered northern Europe, including Great Britain; the Alpine ice sheet covered the Alps. Scattered domes stretched across Siberia and the Arctic shelf. The northern seas were frozen. During the late Upper Paleolithic (Latest Pleistocene) c. 18,000 BP, the Beringia land bridge between Asia and North America was blocked by ice,[15] which may have prevented early Paleo-Indians such as the Clovis culture from directly crossing Beringa to reach the Americas. According to Mark Lynas (through collected data), the Pleistocene's overall climate could be characterized as a continuous El Niño with trade winds in the south Pacific weakening or heading east, warm air rising near Peru, warm water spreading from the west Pacific and the Indian Ocean to the east Pacific, and other El Niño markers.[17] The Paleolithic is often held to finish at the end of the ice age (the end of the Pleistocene epoch), and Earth's climate became warmer. This may have caused or contributed to the extinction of the Pleistocene megafauna, although it is also possible that the late Pleistocene extinctions were (at least in part) caused by other factors such as disease and overhunting by humans.[18][19] New research suggests that the extinction of the woolly mammoth may have been caused by the combined effect of climatic change and human hunting.[19] Scientists suggest that climate change during the end of the Pleistocene caused the mammoths' habitat to shrink in size, resulting in a drop in population. The small populations were then hunted out by Paleolithic humans.[19] The global warming that occurred during the end of the Pleistocene and the beginning of the Holocene may have made it easier for humans to reach mammoth habitats that were previously frozen and inaccessible.[19] Small populations of wooly mammoths survived on isolated Arctic islands, Saint Paul Island and Wrangel Island, till circa 3700 and 1700 BCE respectively. The Wrangel Island population became extinct around the same time the island was settled by prehistoric humans.[20] There's no evidence of prehistoric human presence on Saint Paul island (though early human settlements dating as far back as 6500 BCE were found on nearby Aleutian Islands).[21] Currently agreed upon classifications as Paleolithic geoclimatic episodes[22] Age (before) America Atlantic Europe Maghreb Mediterranean Europe Central Europe 10,000 years Flandrian interglacial Flandriense Mellahiense Versiliense Flandrian interglacial 80,000 years Wisconsin Devensiense Regresión Regresión Wisconsin Stage 140,000 years Sangamoniense Ipswichiense Ouljiense Tirreniense II y III Eemian Stage 200,000 years Illinois Wolstoniense Regresión Regresión Wolstonian Stage 450,000 years Yarmouthiense Hoxniense Anfatiense Tirreniense I Hoxnian Stage 580,000 years Kansas Angliense Regresión Regresión Kansan Stage 750,000 years Aftoniense Cromeriense Maarifiense Siciliense Cromerian Complex 1,100,000 years Nebraska Beestoniense Regresión Regresión Beestonian stage 1,400,000 years interglaciar Ludhamiense Messaudiense Calabriense Donau-Günz Human way of life[edit] An artist's rendering of a temporary wood house, based on evidence found at Terra Amata (in Nice, France) and dated to the Lower Paleolithic (c. 400,000 BP) Nearly all of our knowledge of Paleolithic human culture and way of life comes from archaeology and ethnographic comparisons to modern hunter-gatherer cultures such as the !Kung San who live similarly to their Paleolithic predecessors.[23] The economy of a typical Paleolithic society was a hunter-gatherer economy.[24] Humans hunted wild animals for meat and gathered food, firewood, and materials for their tools, clothes, or shelters.[24] Human population density was very low, around only one person per square mile.[4] This was most likely due to low body fat, infanticide, women regularly engaging in intense endurance exercise,[25] late weaning of infants and a nomadic lifestyle.[4] Like contemporary hunter-gatherers, Paleolithic humans enjoyed an abundance of leisure time unparalleled in both Neolithic farming societies and modern industrial societies.[24][26] At the end of the Paleolithic, specifically the Middle and or Upper Paleolithic, humans began to produce works of art such as cave paintings, rock art and jewellery and began to engage in religious behavior such as burial and ritual.[27] Distribution[edit] At the beginning of the Paleolithic, hominids were found primarily in eastern Africa, east of the Great Rift Valley. Most known hominid fossils dating earlier than one million years before present are found in this area, particularly in Kenya, Tanzania, and Ethiopia. By 1.5-2 million years before present, groups of hominids began leaving Africa and settling southern Europe and Asia. Southern Caucasus was occupied by 1.7 million years BP, and northern China was reached by 1.66 million years BP. By the end of the Lower Paleolithic, members of the hominid family were living in what is now China, western Indonesia, and, in Europe, around the Mediterranean and as far north as England, southern Germany, and Bulgaria. Their further northward expansion may have been limited by the lack of control of fire: studies of cave settlements in Europe indicate no regular use of fire prior to 300,000-400,000 BP.[28] East Asian fossils from this period are typically placed in the genus Homo erectus. Very little fossil evidence is available at known Lower Paleolithic sites in Europe, but it is believed that hominids who inhabited these sites were likewise Homo erectus. There is no evidence of hominids in America, Australia, or almost anywhere in Oceania during this time period. Fates of these early colonists, and their relationships to modern humans, are still subject to debate. According to current archeological and genetic models, there were at least two notable expansion events subsequent to peopling of Eurasia 2-1.5 million years BP. Around 500,000 BP, a group of early humans, frequently called Homo heidelbergensis, came to Europe from Africa and eventually evolved into Neanderthals. In the Middle Paleolithic, Neanderthals were present in Poland. Both Homo erectus and Neanderthals became extinct by the end of the Paleolithic, having been replaced by a new wave of humans, the anatomically modern Homo sapiens, which emerged in eastern Africa circa 200,000 BP, left Africa around 50,000 BP and expanded throughout the planet. It is likely that multiple groups coexisted for some time in certain locations. Neanderthals were still found in parts of Eurasia 30,000 years before present, and engaged in a limited degree of interbreeding with Homo sapiens. Hominid fossils not belonging either to Homo neanderthalensis or to Homo sapiens geni, found in Altai and Indonesia, were radiocarbon dated to 30,000-40,000 BP and 17,000 BP respectively. For the duration of the Paleolithic, human populations remained low, especially outside the equatorial region. The entire population of Europe between 16,000-11,000 BP likely averaged some 30,000 individuals, and, between 40,000-16,000 BP, it was even lower, at 4,000-6,000 individuals.[29] Technology[edit] Two Lower Paleolithic bifaces Stone ball from a set of Paleolithic bolas Tools[edit] Paleolithic humans made tools of stone, bone, and wood.[24] The early paleolithic hominids, Australopithecus, were the first users of stone tools. Excavations in Gona, Ethiopia have produced thousands of artifacts, and through radioisotopic dating and magnetostratigraphy, the sites can be firmly dated to 2.6 million years ago. Evidence shows these early hominids intentionally selected raw materials with good flaking qualities and chose appropriate sized stones for their needs to produce sharp-edged tools for cutting.[30] The earliest Paleolithic stone tool industry, the Olduwan, began around 2.6 million years ago.[31] It contained tools such as choppers, burins and awls. It was completely replaced around 250,000 years ago by the more complex Acheulean industry, which was first conceived by Homo ergaster around 1.8 or 1.65 million years ago.[32] The most recent Lower Paleolithic (Acheulean) implements completely vanished from the archeological record around 100,000 years ago and were replaced by more complex Middle Paleolithic/Middle Stone Age tool kits such as the Mousterian and the Aterian industries.[33] Lower Paleolithic humans used a variety of stone tools, including hand axes and choppers. Although they appear to have used hand axes often, there is disagreement about their use. Interpretations range from cutting and chopping tools, to digging implements, flake cores, the use in traps and a purely ritual significance, maybe in courting behavior. William H. Calvin has suggested that some hand axes could have served as "killer Frisbees" meant to be thrown at a herd of animals at a water hole so as to stun one of them. There are no indications of hafting, and some artifacts are far too large for that. Thus, a thrown hand axe would not usually have penetrated deeply enough to cause very serious injuries. Nevertheless, it could have been an effective weapon for defense against predators. Choppers and scrapers were likely used for skinning and butchering scavenged animals and sharp ended sticks were often obtained for digging up edible roots. Presumably, early humans used wooden spears as early as five million years ago to hunt small animals, much as their relatives, chimpanzees, have been observed to do in Senegal, Africa.[34] Lower Paleolithic humans constructed shelters such as the possible wood hut at Terra Amata. Fire use[edit] Fire was used by the Lower Paleolithic hominid Homo erectus/Homo ergaster as early as 300,000 or 1.5 million years ago and possibly even earlier by the early Lower Paleolithic (Oldowan) hominid Homo habilis and/or by robust australopithecines such as Paranthropus.[4] However, the use of fire only became common in the societies of the following Middle Stone Age/Middle Paleolithic Period.[3] Use of fire reduced mortality rates and provided protection against predators.[35] Early hominids may have begun to cook their food as early as the Lower Paleolithic (c. 1.9 million years ago) or at the latest in the early Middle Paleolithic (c. 250,000 years ago).[36] Some scientists have hypothesized that Hominids began cooking food to defrost frozen meat, which would help ensure their survival in cold regions.[36] Rafts[edit] The Lower Paleolithic hominid Homo erectus possibly invented rafts (c. 800,000 or 840,000 BP) to travel over large bodies of water, which may have allowed a group of Homo erectus to reach the island of Flores and evolve into the small hominid Homo floresiensis. However, this hypothesis is disputed within the anthropological community.[37][38] The possible use of rafts during the Lower Paleolithic may indicate that Lower Paleolithic Hominids such as Homo erectus were more advanced than previously believed, and may have even spoken an early form of modern language.[37] Supplementary evidence from Neanderthal and Modern human sites located around the Mediterranean Sea such as Coa de sa Multa (c. 300,000 BP) has also indicated that both Middle and Upper Paleolithic humans used rafts to travel over large bodies of water (i.e. the Mediterranean Sea) for the purpose of colonizing other bodies of land.[37][39] Advanced tools[edit] Around 200,000 BP, Middle Paleolithic Stone tool manufacturing spawned a tool making technique known as the prepared-core technique, that was more elaborate than previous Acheulean techniques.[7] This technique increased efficiency by allowing the creation of more controlled and consistent flakes.[7] It allowed Middle Paleolithic humans to create stone tipped spears, which were the earliest composite tools, by hafting sharp, pointy stone flakes onto wooden shafts. In addition to improving tool making methods, the Middle Paleolithic also saw an improvement of the tools themselves that allowed access to a wider variety and amount of food sources. For example, microliths or small stone tools or points were invented around 70,000 or 65,000 BP and were essential to the invention of bows and spear throwers in the following Upper Paleolithic period.[35] Harpoons were invented & used for the first time during the late Middle Paleolithic (c.90,000 years ago); the invention of these devices brought fish into the human diets, which provided a hedge against starvation and a more abundant food supply.[39][40] Thanks to their technology and their advanced social structures, Paleolithic groups such as the Neanderthals who had a Middle Paleolithic level of technology, appear to have hunted large game just as well as Upper Paleolithic modern humans[41] and the Neanderthals in particular may have likewise hunted with projectile weapons.[42] Nonetheless, Neanderthal use of projectile weapons in hunting occurred very rarely (or perhaps never) and the Neanderthals hunted large game animals mostly by ambushing them and attacking them with mêlée weapons such as thrusting spears rather than attacking them from a distance with projectile weapons.[27][43] Other inventions[edit] During the Upper Paleolithic, further inventions were made, such as the net (c. 22,000 or 29,000 BP)[35] bolas,[44] the spear thrower (c.30,000 BP), the bow and arrow (c. 25,000 or 30,000 BP)[4] and the oldest example of ceramic art, the Venus of Dolní Věstonice (c. 29,000–25,000 BCE).[4] Early dogs were domesticated, sometime between 30,000 BP and 14,000 BP, presumably to aid in hunting.[45] However, the earliest instances of successful domestication of dogs may be much more ancient than this. Evidence from canine DNA collected by Robert K. Wayne suggests that dogs may have been first domesticated in the late Middle Paleolithic around 100,000 BP or perhaps even earlier.[46] Archeological evidence from the Dordogne region of France demonstrates that members of the European early Upper Paleolithic culture known as the Aurignacian used calendars (c. 30,000 BP). This was a lunar calendar that was used to document the phases of the moon. Genuine solar calendars did not appear until the following Neolithic period.[47] Upper Paleolithic cultures were probably able to time the migration of game animals such as wild horses and deer.[48] This ability allowed humans to become efficient hunters and to exploit a wide variety of game animals.[48] Recent research indicates that the Neanderthals timed their hunts and the migrations of game animals long before the beginning of the Upper Paleolithic.[41] Social organization[edit] Some of this article's listed sources may not be reliable. Please help this article by looking for better, more reliable sources, or by checking whether the references meet the criteria for reliable sources. Unreliable citations may be challenged or deleted. (February 2010) Humans may have taken part in long-distance trade between bands for rare commodities and raw materials (such as stone needed for making tools) as early as 120,000 years ago in Middle Paleolithic. The social organization of the earliest Paleolithic (Lower Paleolithic) societies remains largely unknown to scientists, though Lower Paleolithic hominids such as Homo habilis and Homo erectus are likely to have had more complex social structures than chimpanzee societies.[49] Late Oldowan/Early Acheulean humans such as Homo ergaster/Homo erectus may have been the first people to invent central campsites or home bases and incorporate them into their foraging and hunting strategies like contemporary hunter-gatherers, possibly as early as 1.7 million years ago;[7] however, the earliest solid evidence for the existence of home bases or central campsites (hearths and shelters) among humans only dates back to 500,000 years ago.[7][dead link] Similarly, scientists disagree whether Lower Paleolithic humans were largely monogamous or polygynous.[49] In particular, the Provisional model suggests that bipedalism arose in Pre Paleolithic australopithecine societies as an adaptation to monogamous lifestyles; however, other researchers note that sexual dimorphism is more pronounced in Lower Paleolithic humans such as Homo erectus than in Modern humans, who are less polygynous than other primates, which suggests that Lower Paleolithic humans had a largely polygynous lifestyle, because species that have the most pronounced sexual dimorphism tend more likely to be polygynous.[50] Human societies from the Paleolithic to the early Neolithic farming tribes lived without states and organized governments. For most of the Lower Paleolithic, human societies were possibly more hierarchical than their Middle and Upper Paleolithic descendants, and probably were not grouped into bands,[51] though during the end of the Lower Paleolithic, the latest populations of the hominid Homo erectus may have begun living in small-scale (possibly egalitarian) bands similar to both Middle and Upper Paleolithic societies and modern hunter-gatherers.[51] Middle Paleolithic societies, unlike Lower Paleolithic and early Neolithic ones, consisted of bands that ranged from 20 to 30 or 25 to 100 members and were usually nomadic.[4][51] These bands were formed by several families. Bands sometimes joined together into larger "macrobands" for activities such as acquiring mates and celebrations or where resources were abundant.[4] By the end of the Paleolithic era, about 10,000 BP people began to settle down into permanent locations, and began to rely on agriculture for sustenance in many locations. Much evidence exists that humans took part in long-distance trade between bands for rare commodities (such as ochre, which was often used for religious purposes such as ritual[52][53]) and raw materials, as early as 120,000 years ago in Middle Paleolithic.[27] Inter-band trade may have appeared during the Middle Paleolithic because trade between bands would have helped ensure their survival by allowing them to exchange resources and commodities such as raw materials during times of relative scarcity (i.e. famine, drought).[27] Like in modern hunter-gatherer societies, individuals in Paleolithic societies may have been subordinate to the band as a whole.[23][24] Both Neanderthals and modern humans took care of the elderly members of their societies during the Middle and Upper Paleolithic.[27] Some sources claim that most Middle and Upper Paleolithic societies were possibly fundamentally egalitarian[4][24][39][54] and may have rarely or never engaged in organized violence between groups (i.e. war).[39][55][56][57] Some Upper Paleolithic societies in resource-rich environments (such as societies in Sungir, in what is now Russia) may have had more complex and hierarchical organization (such as tribes with a pronounced hierarchy and a somewhat formal division of labor) and may have engaged in endemic warfare.[39][58] Some argue that there was no formal leadership during the Middle and Upper Paleolithic. Like contemporary egalitarian hunter-gatherers such as the Mbuti pygmies, societies may have made decisions by communal consensus decision making rather than by appointing permanent rulers such as chiefs and monarchs.[9] Nor was there a formal division of labor during the Paleolithic. Each member of the group was skilled at all tasks essential to survival, regardless of individual abilities. Theories to explain the apparent egalitarianism have arisen, notably the Marxist concept of primitive communism.[59][60] Christopher Boehm (1999) has hypothesized that egalitarianism may have evolved in Paleolithic societies because of a need to distribute resources such as food and meat equally to avoid famine and ensure a stable food supply.[61] Raymond C. Kelly speculates that the relative peacefulness of Middle and Upper Paleolithic societies resulted from a low population density, cooperative relationships between groups such as reciprocal exchange of commodities and collaboration on hunting expeditions, and because the invention of projectile weapons such as throwing spears provided less incentive for war, because they increased the damage done to the attacker and decreased the relative amount of territory attackers could gain.[57] However, other sources claim that most Paleolithic groups may have been larger, more complex, sedentary and warlike than most contemporary hunter-gatherer societies, due to occupying more resource-abundant areas than most modern hunter-gatherers who have been pushed into more marginal habitats by agricultural societies.[62] Anthropologists have typically assumed that in Paleolithic societies, women were responsible for gathering wild plants and firewood, and men were responsible for hunting and scavenging dead animals.[4][39] However, analogies to existent hunter-gatherer societies such as the Hadza people and the Australian aborigines suggest that the sexual division of labor in the Paleolithic was relatively flexible. Men may have participated in gathering plants, firewood and insects, and women may have procured small game animals for consumption and assisted men in driving herds of large game animals (such as woolly mammoths and deer) off cliffs.[39][56] Additionally, recent research by anthropologist and archaeologist Steven Kuhn from the University of Arizona is argued to support that this division of labor did not exist prior to the Upper Paleolithic and was invented relatively recently in human pre-history.[63][64] Sexual division of labor may have been developed to allow humans to acquire food and other resources more efficiently.[64] Possibly there was approximate parity between men and women during the Middle and Upper Paleolithic, and that period may have been the most gender-equal time in human history.[55][65][66] Archeological evidence from art and funerary rituals indicates that a number of individual women enjoyed seemingly high status in their communities, and it is likely that both sexes participated in decision making.[66] The earliest known Paleolithic shaman (c. 30,000 BP) was female.[67] Jared Diamond suggests that the status of women declined with the adoption of agriculture because women in farming societies typically have more pregnancies and are expected to do more demanding work than women in hunter-gatherer societies.[68] Like most contemporary hunter-gatherer societies, Paleolithic and the Mesolithic groups probably followed mostly matrilineal and ambilineal descent patterns; patrilineal descent patterns were probably rarer than in the following Neolithic period.[35][53] Art and music[edit] The Venus of Willendorf is one of the most famous Venus figurines. Early examples of artistic expression, such as the Venus of Tan-Tan and the patterns found on elephant bones from Bilzingsleben in Thuringia, may have been produced by Acheulean tool users such as Homo erectus prior to the start of the Middle Paleolithic period. However, the earliest undisputed evidence of art during the Paleolithic period comes from Middle Paleolithic/Middle Stone Age sites such as Blombos Cave –South Africa– in the form of bracelets,[69] beads,[70] rock art,[52] and ochre used as body paint and perhaps in ritual.[39][52] Undisputed evidence of art only becomes common in the following Upper Paleolithic period.[71] According to Robert G. Bednarik, Lower Paleolithic Acheulean tool users began to engage in symbolic behavior such as art around 850,000 BP and decorated themselves with beads and collected exotic stones for aesthetic rather than utilitarian qualities.[72] According to Bednarik, traces of the pigment ochre from late Lower Paleolithic Acheulean archeological sites suggests that Acheulean societies, like later Upper Paleolithic societies, collected and used ochre to create rock art.[72] Nevertheless, it is also possible that the ochre traces found at Lower Paleolithic sites is naturally occurring.[73] Vincent W. Fallio interprets Lower and Middle Paleolithic marking on rocks at sites such as Bilzingsleben (such as zig zagging lines) as accounts or representation of altered states of consciousness[74] though some other scholars interpret them as either simple doodling or as the result of natural processes. Upper Paleolithic humans produced works of art such as cave paintings, Venus figurines, animal carvings and rock paintings.[75] Upper Paleolithic art can be divided into two broad categories: figurative art such as cave paintings that clearly depicts animals (or more rarely humans); and nonfigurative, which consists of shapes and symbols.[75] Cave paintings have been interpreted in a number of ways by modern archeologists. The earliest explanation, by the prehistorian Abbe Breuil, interpreted the paintings as a form of magic designed to ensure a successful hunt.[76] However, this hypothesis fails to explain the existence of animals such as saber-toothed cats and lions, which were not hunted for food, and the existence of half-human, half-animal beings in cave paintings. The anthropologist David Lewis-Williams has suggested that Paleolithic cave paintings were indications of shamanistic practices, because the paintings of half-human, half-animal paintings and the remoteness of the caves are reminiscent of modern hunter-gatherer shamanistic practices.[76] Symbol-like images are more common in Paleolithic cave paintings than are depictions of animals or humans, and unique symbolic patterns might have been trademarks that represent different Upper Paleolithic ethnic groups.[77] Venus figurines have evoked similar controversy. Archeologists and anthropologists have described the figurines as representations of goddesses, pornographic imagery, apotropaic amulets used for sympathetic magic, and even as self-portraits of women themselves.[39][78] R. Dale Guthrie[79] has studied not only the most artistic and publicized paintings, but also a variety of lower-quality art and figurines, and he identifies a wide range of skill and ages among the artists. He also points out that the main themes in the paintings and other artifacts (powerful beasts, risky hunting scenes and the over-sexual representation of women) are to be expected in the fantasies of adolescent males during the Upper Paleolithic. Bradshaw rock paintings found in the north-west Kimberley region of Western Australia. The Venus figurines have sometimes been interpreted as representing a mother goddess; the abundance of such female imagery has led some to believe that Upper Paleolithic (and later Neolithic) societies had a female-centered religion and a female-dominated society. For example, this was proposed by the archeologist Marija Gimbutas and the feminist scholar Merlin Stone who was the author of the 1978 book When God Was a Woman.[80][81] Various other explanations for the purpose of the figurines have been proposed, such as Catherine McCoid and LeRoy McDermott’s hypothesis that the figurines were created as self-portraits of actual women[78] and R.Dale Gutrie's hypothesis that the venus figurines represented a kind of "stone age pornography". The origins of music during the Paleolithic are unknown, since the earliest forms of music probably did not use musical instruments but instead used the human voice and or natural objects such as rocks, which leave no trace in the archaeological record. However, the anthropological and archeological designation suggests that human music first arose when language, art and other modern behaviors developed in the Middle or the Upper Paleolithic period. Music may have developed from rhythmic sounds produced by daily activities such as cracking nuts by hitting them with stones, because maintaining a rhythm while working may have helped people to become more efficient at daily activities.[82] An alternative theory originally proposed by Charles Darwin explains that music may have begun as a hominid mating strategy as many birds and some other animals produce music like calls to attract mates.[83] This hypothesis is generally less accepted than the previous hypothesis, but it nonetheless provides a possible alternative. Another explanation is that humans began to make music simply because of the pleasure it produced. Upper Paleolithic (and possibly Middle Paleolithic)[84] humans used flute-like bone pipes as musical instruments,[39][85] and music may have played a large role in the religious lives of Upper Paleolithic hunter-gatherers. As with modern hunter-gatherer societies, music may have been used in ritual or to help induce trances. In particular, it appears that animal skin drums may have been used in religious events by Upper Paleolithic shamans, as shown by the remains of drum-like instruments from some Upper Paleolithic graves of shamans and the ethnographic record of contemporary hunter-gatherer shamanic and ritual practices.[67][75] Religion and beliefs[edit] Main article: Paleolithic Religion Picture of a half-human, half-animal being in a Paleolithic cave painting in Dordogne. France. Archeologists believe that cave paintings of half-human, half-animal beings may be evidence for early shamanic practices during the Paleolithic. According to James B. Harrod humankind first developed religious and spiritual beliefs during the Middle Paleolithic or Upper Paleolithic.[86] Controversial scholars of prehistoric religion and anthropology, James Harrod and Vincent W. Fallio, have recently proposed that religion and spirituality (and art) may have first arisen in Pre-Paleolithic chimpanzees[87] or Early Lower Paleolithic (Oldowan) societies.[74][88] According to Fallio, the common ancestor of chimpanzees and humans experienced altered states of consciousness and partook in ritual, and ritual was used in their societies to strengthen social bonding and group cohesion.[74] Middle Paleolithic humans' use of burials at sites such as Krapina, Croatia (c. 130,000 BP) and Qafzeh, Israel (c. 100,000 BP) have led some anthropologists and archeologists, such as Philip Lieberman, to believe that Middle Paleolithic humans may have possessed a belief in an afterlife and a "concern for the dead that transcends daily life".[8] Cut marks on Neanderthal bones from various sites, such as Combe-Grenal and Abri Moula in France, suggest that the Neanderthals like some contemporary human cultures may have practiced ritual defleshing for (presumably) religious reasons. According to recent archeological findings from H. heidelbergensis sites in Atapuerca, humans may have begun burying their dead much earlier, during the late Lower Paleolithic; but this theory is widely questioned in the scientific community. Likewise, some scientists have proposed that Middle Paleolithic societies such as Neanderthal societies may also have practiced the earliest form of totemism or animal worship, in addition to their (presumably religious) burial of the dead. In particular, Emil Bächler suggested (based on archeological evidence from Middle Paleolithic caves) that a bear cult was widespread among Middle Paleolithic Neanderthals.[89] A claim that evidence was found for Middle Paleolithic animal worship c 70,000 BCE originates from the Tsodilo Hills in the African Kalahari desert has been denied by the original investigators of the site.[90] Animal cults in the following Upper Paleolithic period, such as the bear cult, may have had their origins in these hypothetical Middle Paleolithic animal cults.[91] Animal worship during the Upper Paleolithic was intertwined with hunting rites.[91] For instance, archeological evidence from art and bear remains reveals that the bear cult apparently involved a type of sacrificial bear ceremonialism, in which a bear was sliced with arrows, finished off by a blast in the lungs, and ritualistically worshipped near a clay bear statue covered by a bear fur with the skull and the body of the bear buried separately.[91] Barbara Ehrenreich controversially theorizes that the sacrificial hunting rites of the Upper Paleolithic (and by extension Paleolithic cooperative big-game hunting) gave rise to war or warlike raiding during the following Epi-Paleolithic/Mesolithic or late Upper Paleolithic period.[56] The existence of anthropomorphic images and half-human, half-animal images in the Upper Paleolithic period may further indicate that Upper Paleolithic humans were the first people to believe in a pantheon of gods or supernatural beings,[92] though such images may instead indicate shamanistic practices similar to those of contemporary tribal societies.[76] The earliest known undisputed burial of a shaman (and by extension the earliest undisputed evidence of shamans and shamanic practices) dates back to the early Upper Paleolithic era (c. 30,000 BP) in what is now the Czech Republic.[67] However, during the early Upper Paleolithic it was probably more common for all members of the band to participate equally and fully in religious ceremonies, in contrast to the religious traditions of later periods when religious authorities and part-time ritual specialists such as shamans, priests and medicine men were relatively common and integral to religious life.[24] Additionally, it is also possible that Upper Paleolithic religions, like contemporary and historical animistic and polytheistic religions, believed in the existence of a single creator deity in addition to other supernatural beings such as animistic spirits.[93] Vincent W. Fallio writes that ancestor cults first emerged in complex Upper Paleolithic societies. He argues that the elites of these societies (like the elites of many more contemporary complex hunter-gatherers such as the Tlingit) may have used special rituals and ancestor worship to solidify control over their societies, by convincing their subjects that they possess a link to the spirit world that also gives them control over the earthly realm.[74] Secret societies may have served a similar function in these complex quasi-theocratic societies, by dividing the religious practices of these cultures into the separate spheres of Popular Religion and Elite Religion.[74] Religion was possibly apotropaic; specifically, it may have involved sympathetic magic.[39] The Venus figurines, which are abundant in the Upper Paleolithic archeological record, provide an example of possible Paleolithic sympathetic magic, as they may have been used for ensuring success in hunting and to bring about fertility of the land and women.[4] The Upper Paleolithic Venus figurines have sometimes been explained as depictions of an earth goddess similar to Gaia, or as representations of a goddess who is the ruler or mother of the animals.[91][94] James Harrod has described them as representative of female (and male) shamanistic spiritual transformation processes.[95] Diet and nutrition[edit] People may have first fermented grapes in animal skin pouches to create wine during the Paleolithic.[96] Paleolithic hunting and gathering people ate varying proportions of leafy vegetables, fruit, nuts and insects, meat, fish, and shellfish.[97][98] However, there is little direct evidence of the relative proportions of plant and animal foods.[99] Although the term "paleolithic diet", without references to a specific timeframe or locale, is sometimes used with an implication that most humans shared a certain diet during the entire era, that is not entirely accurate. The Paleolithic was an extended period of time, during which multiple technological advances were made, many of which had impact on human dietary structure. For example, humans probably did not possess the control of fire until the Middle Paleolithic,[100] or tools necessary to engage in extensive fishing.[citation needed] On the other hand, both these technologies are generally agreed to have been widely available to humans by the end of the Paleolithic (consequently, allowing humans in some regions of the planet to rely heavily on fishing and hunting). In addition, the Paleolithic involved a substantial geographical expansion of human populations. During the Lower Paleolithic, ancestors of modern humans are thought to have been constrained to Africa east of the Great Rift Valley. During the Middle and Upper Paleolithic, humans greatly expanded their area of settlement, reaching ecosystems as diverse as New Guinea and Alaska, and adapting their diets to whatever local resources available. Another view is that until the Upper Paleolithic, humans were frugivores (fruit eaters) who supplemented their meals with carrion, eggs, and small prey such as baby birds and mussels, and only on rare occasions managed to kill and consume big game such as antelopes.[101] This view is supported by studies of higher apes, particularly chimpanzees. Chimpanzees are the closest to humans genetically, sharing more than 96% of their DNA code with humans, and their digestive tract is functionally very similar to that of humans.[102] Chimpanzees are primarily frugivores, but they could and would consume and digest animal flesh, given the opportunity. In general, their actual diet in the wild is about 95% plant-based, with the remaining 5% filled with insects, eggs, and baby animals.[103][104] In some ecosystems, however, chimpanzees are predatory, forming parties to hunt monkeys.[105] Some comparative studies of human and higher primate digestive tracts do suggest that humans have evolved to obtain greater amounts of calories from sources such as animal foods, allowing them to shrink the size of the gastrointestinal tract relative to body mass and to increase the brain mass instead.[106][107] A difficulty with the frugivore point of view is that humans are established to conditionally require certain long-chain polyunsaturated fatty acids (LC-PUFAs), such as AA and DHA, from the diet.[108] Humans' LC-PUFA requirements are much greater than chimpanzees' because of humans' larger brain mass, and humans' abilities to synthesize them from other nutrients are poor, suggesting readily available external sources.[109] Pregnant and lactating females require 100 mg of DHA per day. However, LC-PUFAs are almost nonexistent in plants and in most tissues of warm-climate animals.[original research?] Anthropologists have diverse opinions about the proportions of plant and animal foods consumed. Just as with still existing hunters and gatherers, there were many varied "diets" - in different groups - and also varying through this vast amount of time. Some paleolithic hunter-gatherers consumed a significant amount of meat and possibly obtained most of their food from hunting,[110] while others are shown as a primarily plant-based diet,[63] Most, if not all, are believed to have been opportunistic omnivores.[111] One hypothesis is that carbohydrate tubers (plant underground storage organs) may have been eaten in high amounts by pre-agricultural humans.[112][113][114][115] It is thought that the Paleolithic diet included as much as 1.65–1.9 kilograms per day of fruit and vegetables.[116] The relative proportions of plant and animal foods in the diets of Paleolithic people often varied between regions, with more meat being necessary in colder regions (which weren't populated by anatomically modern humans until 30,000-50,000 BP).[117] It is generally agreed that many modern hunting and fishing tools, such as fish hooks, nets, bows, and poisons, weren't introduced until the Upper Paleolithic and possibly even Neolithic.[35] The only hunting tools widely available to humans during any significant part of the Paleolithic period were hand-held spears and harpoons. There's evidence of Paleolithic people killing and eating seals and elands as far as 100,000 years BP. On the other hand, buffalo bones found in African caves from the same period are typically of very young or very old individuals, and there's no evidence that pigs, elephants or rhinos were hunted by humans at the time.[118] Paleolithic peoples suffered less famine and malnutrition than the Neolithic farming tribes that followed them.[23][119] This was partly because Paleolithic hunter-gatherers accessed to a wider variety natural foods, which allowed them a more nutritious diet and a decreased risk of famine.[23][25][68] Many of the famines experienced by Neolithic (and some modern) farmers were caused or amplified by their dependence on a small number of crops.[23][25][68] It is thought that wild foods can have a significantly different nutritional profile than cultivated foods.[120] The greater amount of meat obtained by hunting big game animals in Paleolithic diets than Neolithic diets may have also allowed Paleolithic hunter-gatherers to enjoy a more nutritious diet than Neolithic agriculturalists.[119] It has been argued that the shift from hunting and gathering to agriculture resulted in an increasing focus on a limited variety of foods, with meat likely taking a back seat to plants.[121] It is also unlikely that Paleolithic hunter-gatherers were affected by modern diseases of affluence such as Type 2 diabetes, coronary heart disease and cerebrovascular disease, because they ate mostly lean meats and plants and frequently engaged in intense physical activity,[122][123] and because the average lifespan was shorter than the age of common-onset of these conditions.[124][125] Large-seeded legumes were part of the human diet long before the Neolithic agricultural revolution, as evident from archaeobotanical finds from the Mousterian layers of Kebara Cave, in Israel.[126] There is evidence suggesting that Paleolithic societies were gathering wild cereals for food use at least as early as 30,000 years ago.[127] However, seeds, such as grains and beans, were rarely eaten and never in large quantities on a daily basis.[128] Recent archeological evidence also indicates that winemaking may have originated in the Paleolithic, when early humans drank the juice of naturally fermented wild grapes from animal-skin pouches.[96] Paleolithic humans consumed animal organ meats, including the livers, kidneys and brains. Upper Paleolithic cultures appear to have had significant knowledge about plants and herbs and may have, albeit very rarely, practiced rudimentary forms of horticulture.[129] In particular, bananas and tubers may have been cultivated as early as 25,000 BP in southeast Asia.[62] Late Upper Paleolithic societies also appear to have occasionally practiced pastoralism and animal husbandry, presumably for dietary reasons. For instance, some European late Upper Paleolithic cultures domesticated and raised reindeer, presumably for their meat or milk, as early as 14,000 BP.[45] Humans also probably consumed hallucinogenic plants during the Paleolithic period.[4] The Australian Aborigines have been consuming a variety of native animal and plant foods, called bushfood, for an estimated 60,000 years, since the Middle Paleolithic. Large game animals such as deer were an important source of protein in Middle and Upper Paleolithic diets. People during the Middle Paleolithic, such as the Neanderthals and Middle Paleolithic Homo sapiens in Africa, began to catch shellfish for food as revealed by shellfish cooking in Neanderthal sites in Italy about 110,000 years ago and Middle Paleolithic Homo sapiens sites at Pinnacle Point, in Africa around 164,000 BP.[39][130] Although fishing only became common during the Upper Paleolithic,[39][131] fish have been part of human diets long before the dawn of the Upper Paleolithic and have certainly been consumed by humans since at least the Middle Paleolithic.[48] For example, the Middle Paleolithic Homo sapiens in the region now occupied by the Democratic Republic of the Congo hunted large 6-foot (1.8 m)-long catfish with specialized barbed fishing points as early as 90,000 years ago.[39][48] The invention of fishing allowed some Upper Paleolithic and later hunter-gatherer societies to become sedentary or semi-nomadic, which altered their social structures.[85] Example societies are the Lepenski Vir as well as some contemporary hunter-gatherers such as the Tlingit. In some instances (at least the Tlingit) they developed social stratification, slavery and complex social structures such as chiefdoms.[35] Anthropologists such as Tim White suggest that cannibalism was common in human societies prior to the beginning of the Upper Paleolithic, based on the large amount of “butchered human" bones found in Neanderthal and other Lower/Middle Paleolithic sites.[132] Cannibalism in the Lower and Middle Paleolithic may have occurred because of food shortages.[133] However, it may have been for religious reasons, and would coincide with the development of religious practices thought to have occurred during the Upper Paleolithic.[91][134] Nonetheless, it remains possible that Paleolithic societies never practiced cannibalism, and that the damage to recovered human bones was either the result of ritual post-mortem bone cleaning or predation by carnivores such as saber tooth cats, lions and hyenas.[91] See also[edit] Abbassia Pluvial Caveman Japanese Paleolithic Lascaux Late Glacial Maximum List of archaeological sites by continent and age#Palaeolithic Luzia Woman Mousterian Pluvial Origins of society Palaeoarchaeology Paleolithic lifestyle Settlement of the Americas Turkana Boy References[edit] ^ Jones, Daniel (2003) [1917], Peter Roach, James Hartmann and Jane Setter, eds., English Pronouncing Dictionary, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, ISBN 3-12-539683-2  ^ Christian, David (2014). Big History: Between Nothing and Everything. New York, New York: McGraw Hill Education. p. 93.  |access-date= requires |url= (help) ^ a b Toth, Nicholas; Schick, Kathy (2007). "Handbook of Paleoanthropology".  In Henke, H.C. Winfried; Hardt, Thorolf; Tatersall, Ian. Handbook of Paleoanthropology. Volume 3. Berlin; Heidelberg; New York: Springer-Verlag. p. 1944. (PRINT: ISBN 978-3-540-32474-4 ONLINE: ISBN 978-3-540-33761-4) ^ a b c d e f g h i j k l McClellan (2006). Science and Technology in World History: An Introduction. Baltimore, Maryland: JHU Press. ISBN 0-8018-8360-1.  Pages 6–12 ^ Biological origins of modern human behavior part3 ^ Biological origins of modern human behavior part 1 ^ a b c d e "Human Evolution," Microsoft Encarta Online Encyclopedia 2007 Contributed by Richard B. Potts, B.A., Ph.D. ^ a b Philip Lieberman (1991). Uniquely Human. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press. ISBN 0-674-92183-6.  ^ a b Kusimba, Sibel (2003). African Foragers: Environment, Technology, Interactions. Rowman Altamira. p. 285. ISBN 0-7591-0154-X.  ^ Gavashelishvili, A.; Tarkhnishvili, D. (2016). "Biomes and human distribution during the last ice age". Global Ecology and Biogeography 25: 563–574. doi:10.1111/geb.12437.  CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list (link) ^ a b John Weinstock. "Sami Prehistory Revisited: transactions, admixture and assimilation in the phylogeographic picture of Scandinavia".  ^ Lubbock, John (1872). Pre-Historic Times, as Illustrated by Ancient Remains, and the Manners and Customs of Modern Savages, Williams and Norgate (p 75) ISBN 978-1421270395. ^ "The Pleistocene Epoch". University of California Museum of Paleontology. Retrieved 22 August 2014.  ^ a b "University of California Museum of Paleontology website the Pliocene epoch(accessed March 25)". Ucmp.berkeley.edu. Retrieved 2010-01-31.  ^ a b Christopher Scotese. "Paleomap project". The Earth has been in an Ice House Climate for the last 30 million years. Retrieved 2008-03-23.  ^ Van Andel, Tjeerd H. (1994). New Views on an Old Planet: A History of Global Change. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. pp. 454 pp. ISBN 0-521-44243-5.  ^ National Geographic Channel, Six Degrees Could Change The World, Mark Lynas interview. Retrieved February 14, 2008. ^ "University of California Museum of Paleontology website the Pleistocene epoch(accessed March 25)". Ucmp.berkeley.edu. Retrieved 2010-01-31.  ^ a b c d Kimberly Johnson. "National geographic news". Climate Change, Then Humans, Drove Mammoths Extinct from National geographic. Retrieved 2008-04-04.  ^ Nowak, Ronald M. (1999). Walker's Mammals of the World. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press. ISBN 0-8018-5789-9.  ^ "Phylogeographic Analysis of the mid-Holocene Mammoth from Qagnax Cave, St. Paul Island, Alaska" (PDF).  ^ Gamble, Clive (1990), El poblamiento Paleolítico de Europa, Barcelona: Editorial Crítica. ISBN 84-7423-445-X. ^ a b c d e Leften Stavros Stavrianos (1997). Lifelines from Our Past: A New World History. New Jersey, USA: M.E. Sharpe. ISBN 0-13-357005-3.  Pages 9–13Page 70 ^ a b c d e f g Leften Stavros Stavrianos (1991). A Global History from Prehistory to the Present. New Jersey, USA: Prentice Hall. ISBN 0-13-357005-3.  Pages 9–13 ^ a b c "The Consequences of Domestication and Sedentism by Emily Schultz, et al". Primitivism.com. Retrieved 2010-01-31.  ^ Felipe Fernandez Armesto (2003). Ideas that changed the world. Newyork: Dorling Kindersley limited. p. 400. ISBN 978-0-7566-3298-4. ; Page 10 ^ a b c d e Hillary Mayell. "When Did "Modern" Behavior Emerge in Humans?". National Geographic News. Retrieved 2008-02-05.  ^ "On the earliest evidence for habitual use of fire in Europe", Wil Roebroeks et al, PNAS, 2011 ^ Jean-Pierre Bocquet-Appel; et al. (2005). "Estimates of Upper Palaeolithic meta-population size in Europe from archaeological data" (PDF). Journal of Archaeological Science 32: 1656–1668. doi:10.1016/j.jas.2005.05.006.  ^ Semaw, Sileshi (2000). "The World's Oldest Stone Artefacts from Gona, Ethiopia: Their Implications for Understanding Stone Technology and Patterns of Human Evolution Between 2.6-1.5 Million Years Ago". Journal of Archaeological Science 27 (12): 1197–1214. doi:10.1006/jasc.1999.0592.  ^ Klein, R. (1999). The Human Career. University of Chicago Press.  ^ Roche H et al., 2002, Les sites archaéologiques pio-pléistocènes de la formation de Nachuku 663–673, qtd in Scarre, 2005 ^ Clark, JD, Variability in primary and secondary technologies of the Later Acheulian in Africa in Milliken, S and Cook, J (eds), 2001 ^ Rick Weiss, "Chimps Observed Making Their Own Weapons", The Washington Post, February 22, 2007 ^ a b c d e f Marlowe FW (2005). "Hunter-gatherers and human evolution" (PDF). Evolutionary Anthropology 14 (2): 15294. doi:10.1002/evan.20046.  ^ a b Wrangham R, Conklin-Brittain N. (September 2003). "Cooking as a biological trait" (PDF). Comp Biochem Physiol a Mol Integr Physiol 136 (1): 35–46. doi:10.1016/S1095-6433(03)00020-5. PMID 14527628.  ^ a b c "First Mariners Project Photo Gallery 1". Mc2.vicnet.net.au. Retrieved 2010-01-31.  ^ "First Mariners - National Geographic project 2004". Mc2.vicnet.net.au. 2004-10-02. Retrieved 2010-01-31.  ^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n Miller, Barbra; Bernard Wood; Andrew Balansky; Julio Mercader; Melissa Panger (2006). Anthropology. Boston Massachusetts: Allyn and Bacon. p. 768. ISBN 0-205-32024-4.  ^ "Human Evolution," Microsoft Encarta Online Encyclopedia 2007 Contributed by Richard B. Potts, B.A., Ph.D. ^ a b Ann Parson. "Neanderthals Hunted as Well as Humans, Study Says". National Geographic News. Retrieved 2008-02-01.  ^ Boëda, E.; Geneste, J.M.; Griggo, C.; Mercier, N.; Muhesen, S.; Reyss, J.L.; Taha, A.; Valladas, H. (1999). "A Levallois point embedded in the vertebra of a wild ass (Equus africanus): Hafting, projectiles and Mousterian hunting". Antiquity 73: 394–402.  ^ Cameron Balbirnie (2005-02-10). "The icy truth behind Neanderthals". BBC News. Retrieved 2008-04-01.  ^ J. Chavaillon, D. Lavallée, « Bola », in Dictionnaire de la Préhistoire, PUF, 1988. ^ a b Lloyd, J & Mitchinson, J: "The Book of General Ignorance". Faber & Faber, 2006. ^ Christine Mellot. "stalking the ancient dog" (PDF). Science news. Retrieved 2008-01-03.  ^ Felipe Fernandez Armesto (2003). Ideas that changed the world. New York: Dorling Kindersley limited. p. 400. ISBN 978-0-7566-3298-4. ; [1] ^ a b c d "Stone Age," Microsoft Encarta Online Encyclopedia 2007 Contributed by Kathy Schick, B.A., M.A., Ph.D. and Nicholas Toth, B.A., M.A., Ph.D. ^ a b Nancy White. "Intro to archeology The First People and Culture". Introduction to archeology. Retrieved 2008-03-20.  ^ James Urquhart (2007-08-08). "Finds test human origins theory". BBC News. Retrieved 2008-03-20.  ^ a b c Christopher Boehm (1999) "Hierarchy in the Forest: The Evolution of Egalitarian Behavior" page 198–208 Harvard University Press ^ a b c Sean Henahan. "Blombos Cave art". Science News. Retrieved 2008-03-12.  ^ a b Felipe Fernandez Armesto (2003). Ideas that changed the world. Newyork: Dorling Kindersley limited. p. 400. ISBN 978-0-7566-3298-4. ; [2] ^ Christopher Boehm (1999) "Hierarchy in the Forest: The Evolution of Egalitarian Behavior" page 198 Harvard University Press ^ a b R Dale Gutrie (2005). The Nature of Paleolithic art. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. ISBN 0-226-31126-0.  Pages 420-422 ^ a b c Barbara Ehrenreich (1997). Blood Rites: Origins and History of the Passions of War. London, United Kingdom: Macmillan. ISBN 0-8050-5787-0.  Page 123 ^ a b Kelly, Raymond (October 2005). "The evolution of lethal intergroup violence". PNAS 102 (43): 15294–8. doi:10.1073/pnas.0505955102. PMC 1266108. PMID 16129826.  ^ Kelly, Raymond C. Warless societies and the origin of war. Ann Arbor : University of Michigan Press, 2000. ^ Marx, Karl; Friedrich Engels (1848). The Communist Manifesto. London. p. 87. ISBN 978-1-59986-995-7.  Page 71 ^ Rigby, Stephen Henry (1999). Marxism and History: A Critical Introduction, p111 & p314 Manchester University Press, (ISBN 0-7190-5612-8). ^ Christopher Boehm (1999) "Hierarchy in the Forest: The Evolution of Egalitarian Behavior" page 192 Harvard university press ^ a b Thomas M. Kiefer (Spring 2002). "Anthropology E-20". Lecture 8 Subsistence, Ecology and Food production. Harvard University. Retrieved 2008-03-11.  ^ a b Dahlberg, Frances (1975). Woman the Gatherer. London: Yale university press. ISBN 0-300-02989-6.  ^ a b Stefan Lovgren. "Sex-Based Roles Gave Modern Humans an Edge, Study Says". National Geographic News. Retrieved 2008-02-03.  ^ Leften Stavros Stavrianos (1991). A Global History from Prehistory to the Present. New Jersey, USA: Prentice Hall. ISBN 0-13-357005-3. the sexes were more equal during Paleolithic millennia than at any time since.  Page 9 ^ a b Museum of Antiquites web site . Retrieved February 13, 2008. ^ a b c Tedlock, Barbara. 2005. The Woman in the Shaman's Body: Reclaiming the Feminine in Religion and Medicine. New York: Bantam. ^ a b c Jared Diamond. "The Worst Mistake in the History of the Human Race". Discover. Retrieved 2008-01-14.  ^ Jonathan Amos (2004-04-15). "Cave yields 'earliest jewellery'". BBC News. Retrieved 2008-03-12.  ^ Hillary Mayell. "Oldest Jewelry? "Beads" Discovered in African Cave". National Geographic News. Retrieved 2008-03-03.  ^ "Human Evolution," Microsoft Encarta Online Encyclopedia 2007 Contributed by Richard B. Potts, B.A., Ph.D. ^ a b Robert G. Bednarik. "Beads and the origins of symbolism". Retrieved 2008-04-05.  ^ Richard G. Klein, "The Dawn of Human Culture" ISBN 0-471-25252-2 ^ a b c d e Vincent W. Fallio (2006). New Developments in Consciousness Research. New York, United States: Nova Publishers. ISBN 1-60021-247-6.  Pages 98 to 109 ^ a b c "Paleolithic Art," Microsoft Encarta Online Encyclopedia 2007 http://encarta.msn.com/encyclopedia_761578676/Paleolithic_Art.html ^ a b c Jean Clottes. "Shamanism in Prehistory". Bradshaw foundation. Retrieved 2008-03-11.  ^ "Paleolithic Art," Microsoft Encarta Online Encyclopedia 2007 http://encarta.msn.com/encyclopedia_761578676/Paleolithic_Art.html Microsoft Encarta ^ a b McDermott, LeRoy. "Self-Representation in Upper Paleolithic Female Figurines". Current Anthropology, Vol. 37, No. 2, April., 1996. pp. 227–275. ^ R. Dale Guthrie, The Nature of Paleolithic Art. University Of Chicago Press, 2006. ISBN 978-0-226-31126-5. Preface. ^ Merlin Stone. (1978). When God Was a Woman. Harcourt Brace Jovanovich. p. 265. ISBN 0-15-696158-X.  ^ Marija Gimbutas 1991. The Civilization of the Goddess ^ Karl Bücher. Trabajo y ritmo. Biblioteca Científico-Filosófica, Madrid. ^ Charles Darwin. The origin of man. Edimat books, S. A. ISBN 84-8403-034-2. ^ Nelson, D.E., Radiocarbon dating of bone and charcoal from Divje babe I cave, cited by Morley, p. 47 ^ a b Bahn, Paul (1996) "The atlas of world archeology" Copyright 2000 The Brown Reference Group PLC ^ "About OriginsNet by James Harrod". Originsnet.org. Retrieved 2010-01-31.  ^ "Appendices for chimpanzee spirituality by James Harrod" (PDF). Retrieved 2010-01-31.  ^ "Oldowan Art, Religion, Symbols, Mind by James Harrod". Originsnet.org. Retrieved 2010-01-31.  ^ Wunn, Ina (2000). "Beginning of Religion", Numen, 47(4), pp. 434–435 ^ Robbins, Lawrence H.; AlecC. Campbell; George A. Brook; Michael L. Murphy (June 2007). "World's Oldest Ritual Site? The "Python Cave" at Tsodilo Hills World Heritage Site, Botswana" (PDF). NYAME AKUMA, the Bulletin of the Society of Africanist Archaeologists (67). Retrieved 1 December 2010.  ^ a b c d e f Karl J. Narr. "Prehistoric religion". Britannica online encyclopedia 2008. Retrieved 2008-03-28.  ^ Steven Mithen (1996). The Prehistory of the Mind: The Cognitive Origins of Art, Religion and Science. Thames & Hudson. ISBN 0-500-05081-3.  ^ Lerro, Bruce (2000). From earth spirits to sky gods Socioecological Origins of Monotheism. Lanham MD: Lexington Press. p. 327. ISBN 0-7391-0098-X.  pages 17–20 ^ Christopher L. C. E. Witcombe, "Women in the Stone Age," in the essay "The Venus of Willendorf" . Retrieved March 13, 2008. ^ "Upper Paleolithic Art, Religion, Symbols, Mind By James Harrod". Originsnet.org. Retrieved 2010-01-31.  ^ a b William Cocke. "First Wine? Archaeologist Traces Drink to Stone Age". National Geographic News. Retrieved 2008-02-03.  ^ Gowlett JAJ (2003). "What actually was the Stone Age Diet?" (PDF). J Nutr Environ Med 13 (3): 143–7. doi:10.1080/13590840310001619338.  ^ Weiss E, Wetterstrom W, Nadel D, Bar-Yosef O (June 29, 2004). "The broad spectrum revisited: Evidence from plant remains". Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 101 (26): 9551–5. doi:10.1073/pnas.0402362101. PMC 470712. PMID 15210984.  CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list (link) ^ Richards, MP (December 2002). "A brief review of the archaeological evidence for Palaeolithic and Neolithic subsistence". Eur J Clin Nutr 56 (12): 1270–1278. doi:10.1038/sj.ejcn.1601646. PMID 12494313.  ^ Johanson, Donald; Blake, Edgar (2006). From Lucy to Language: Revised, Updated, and Expanded. Berlin: Simon & Schuster. pp. 96–97. ISBN 0743280644.  ^ Donna Hart, Robert W. Sussman. Man the Hunted. ISBN 0-8133-3936-7.  ^ Lovgren, Stefan (31 August 2005). "Chimps, Humans 96 Percent the Same, Gene Study Finds". Retrieved 23 December 2013.  ^ "Chimp hunting and flesh-eating".  ^ "Chimpanzees 'hunt using spears'". BBC News. February 22, 2007.  ^ "The Predatory Behavior and Ecology of Wild Chimpanzees".  ^ Milton, Katharine (1999). "A hypothesis to explain the role of meat-eating in human evolution" (PDF). Evolutionary Anthropology 8 (1): 11–21. doi:10.1002/(SICI)1520-6505(1999)8:1<11::AID-EVAN6>3.0.CO;2-M.  ^ Leslie C. Aiello, Peter Wheeler (1995). "The expensive-tissue hypothesis" (PDF). Current Anthropology 36: 199. doi:10.1086/204350.  ^ Kris-Etherton, PM; Harris, WS; Appel, LJ; Nutrition, Committee (2003). "Fish Consumption, Fish Oil, Omega-3 Fatty Acids, and Cardiovascular Disease". Arteriosclerosis, thrombosis, and vascular biology 23 (2): e20–30. doi:10.1161/01.ATV.0000038493.65177.94. PMID 12588785.  ^ Crawford, M. A.; et al. (1999). "Evidence for the Unique Function of Docosahexaenoic Acid (DHA) During the Evolution of the Modern Hominid Brain" (PDF). Lipids 34: S39–S47. doi:10.1007/bf02562227.  ^ Cordain L. Implications of Plio-Pleistocene Hominin Diets for Modern Humans. In: Early Hominin Diets: The Known, the Unknown, and the Unknowable. Ungar, P (Ed.), Oxford University Press, Oxford, 2006, pp 363–83. ^ Nature's Magic: Synergy in Evolution and the Fate of Humankind By Peter Corning ^ Laden G, Wrangham R (October 2005). "The rise of the hominids as an adaptive shift in fallback foods: plant underground storage organs (USOs) and australopith origins" (PDF). J. Hum. Evol. 49 (4): 482–98. doi:10.1016/j.jhevol.2005.05.007. PMID 16085279.  ^ Wrangham RW, Jones JH, Laden G, Pilbeam D, Conklin-Brittain N (December 1999). "The Raw and the Stolen. Cooking and the Ecology of Human Origins". Curr Anthropol 40 (5): 567–94. doi:10.1086/300083. PMID 10539941.  CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list (link) ^ Yeakel JD, Bennett NC, Koch PL, Dominy NJ (July 2007). "The isotopic ecology of African mole rats informs hypotheses on the evolution of human diet" (PDF). Proc Biol Sci. 274 (1619): 1723–30. doi:10.1098/rspb.2007.0330. PMC 2493578. PMID 17472915.  CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list (link) ^ Hernandez-Aguilar RA, Moore J, Pickering TR (December 2007). "Savanna chimpanzees use tools to harvest the underground storage organs of plants" (PDF). Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 105 (49): 19210–13. doi:10.1073/pnas.0707929104. PMC 2148269. PMID 18032604.  CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list (link) ^ S. Boyd Eaton, Stanley B. Eaton III, Andrew J. Sinclair, Loren Cordain, Neil J. Mann (1998). "Dietary intake of long-chain polyunsaturated fatty acids during the Paleolithic" (PDF). World Rev Nutr Diet: 12–23. doi:10.1159/000059672.  CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list (link) ^ J. A. J. Gowlet (September 2003). "What actually was the stone age diet?" (PDF). Journal of environmental medicine 13 (3): 143–147. doi:10.1080/13590840310001619338. Retrieved 2008-05-04. ) ^ Diamond, Jared. The third chimpanzee: the evolution and future of the human animal.  ^ a b Sharman Apt Russell (2006). Hunger an unnatural history. Basic books. ISBN 0-465-07165-1.  Pages 2 ^ Milton, Katharine (2002). "Hunter-gatherer diets: wild foods signal relief from diseases of affluence (PDF)" (PDF). In Ungar, Peter S. & Teaford, Mark F. Human Diet: Its Origins and Evolution. Westport, CT: Bergin and Garvey. pp. 111–22. ISBN 0-89789-736-6.  CS1 maint: Multiple names: editors list (link) ^ Larsen, Clark Spencer (1 November 2003). "Animal source foods and human health during evolution". Journal of Nutrition 133 (11, Suppl 2): 3893S–3897S. PMID 14672287.  ^ Cordain L, Eaton SB, Sebastian A, Mann N, Lindeberg S, Watkins BA, O'Keefe JH, Brand-Miller J (2005). "Origins and evolution of the Western diet: health implications for the 21st century". Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 81 (2): 341–54. PMID 15699220.  CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list (link) ^ Thorburn AW, Brand JC, Truswell AS. (1 January 1987). "Slowly digested and absorbed carbohydrate in traditional bushfoods: a protective factor against diabetes?". Am J Clin Nutr 45 (1): 98–106. PMID 3541565.  CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list (link) ^ Hillard Kaplan, Kim Hill, Jane Lancaster, and A. Magdalena Hurtado (2000). "A Theory of Human Life History Evolution: Diet, Intelligence and Longevity" (PDF). Evolutionary Anthropology 9 (4): 156–185. doi:10.1002/1520-6505(2000)9:4<156::AID-EVAN5>3.0.CO;2-7. Retrieved 12 September 2010  CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list (link) ^ Caspari, Rachel & Lee, Sang-Hee (July 27, 2004). "Older age becomes common late in human evolution". Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 101 (20): 10895–10900. doi:10.1073/pnas.0402857101. PMC 503716. PMID 15252198. Retrieved 12 September 2010  CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list (link) ^ Efraim Lev, Mordechai E. Kislev, Ofer Bar-Yosef (March 2005). "Mousterian vegetal food in Kebara Cave, Mt. Carmel". Journal of Archaeological Science 32 (3): 475–484. doi:10.1016/j.jas.2004.11.006.  CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list (link) ^ Revedin, Anna; Aranguren, B; Becattini, R; Longo, L; Marconi, E; Lippi, MM; Skakun, N; Sinitsyn, A; et al. (2010). "Thirty thousand-year-old evidence of plant food processing". Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 107 (44): 18815–9. doi:10.1073/pnas.1006993107. PMC 2973873. PMID 20956317.  ^ Lindeberg, Staffan (June 2005). "Palaeolithic diet ("stone age" diet)". Scandinavian Journal of Food & Nutrition 49 (2): 75–77. doi:10.1080/11026480510032043.  ^ Academic American Encyclopedia By Grolier Incorporated (1994). Academic American Encyclopedia By Grolier Incorporated. University of Michigan: Grolier Academic Reference. ; p 61 ^ John Noble Wilford (2007-10-18). "Key Human Traits Tied to Shellfish Remains". New York times. Retrieved 2008-03-11.  ^ African Bone Tools Dispute Key Idea About Human Evolution National Geographic News article. ^ Tim D. White (2006-09-15). Once were Cannibals. Evolution: A Scientific American Reader. ISBN 978-0-226-74269-4. Retrieved 2008-02-14.  ^ James Owen. "Neandertals Turned to Cannibalism, Bone Cave Suggests". National Geographic News. Retrieved 2008-02-03.  ^ Pathou-Mathis M (2000). "Neanderthal subsistence behaviours in Europe". International Journal of Osteoarchaeology 10 (5): 379–395. doi:10.1002/1099-1212(200009/10)10:5<379::AID-OA558>3.0.CO;2-4.  v t e Three-age system Stone Age Prehistoric technology Stone tool Flint tool Paleolithic Mesolithic Neolithic Lower Paleolithic Middle Paleolithic Upper Paleolithic Japanese Paleolithic Paleolithic Europe Middle Stone Age Later Stone Age Epipaleolithic Pre-Pottery Neolithic Pre-Pottery Neolithic A Pre-Pottery Neolithic B Neolithic Revolution List of Neolithic cultures of China Nordic Stone Age Neolithic British Isles South Asian Stone Age Stone-Age Poland Recent African origin of modern humans Bronze Age Chalcolithic Bronze Atlantic Bronze Age Nordic Bronze Age Bronze Age in Romania Bronze Age collapse Iron Age History of ferrous metallurgy Iron meteorite Metallurgy British Iron Age Pre-Roman Iron Age Roman Iron Age Germanic Iron Age Iron Age Scandinavia Iron Age India Iron Age China Tsebelda culture List of archaeological periods List of time periods v t e Prehistoric technology Prehistory timeline outline Stone Age subdivisions New Stone Age synoptic table Technology history   Tools Farming Neolithic Revolution founder crops New World crops Ard / plough Celt Digging stick Domestication Goad Irrigation Secondary products Sickle Terracing Food processing Fire Basket Cooking Earth oven Granaries Grinding slab Ground stone Hearth Aşıklı Höyük Qesem Cave Manos Metate Mortar and pestle Pottery Quern-stone Storage pit Hunting Arrow Boomerang throwing stick Bow and arrow history Nets Spear Spear-thrower baton harpoon woomera Schöningen Spears Projectile points Arrowhead Bare Island Cascade Clovis Cresswell Cumberland Eden Folsom Lamoka Manis Site Plano Transverse arrowhead Toolmaking Earliest toolmaking Oldowan Acheulean Mousterian Clovis culture Cupstone Fire hardening Gravettian culture Hafting Hand axe Grooves Langdale axe industry Levallois technique Lithic core Lithic reduction analysis debitage flake Lithic technology Magdalenian culture Metallurgy Microblade technology Mining Prepared-core technique Solutrean industry Striking platform Tool stone Uniface Yubetsu technique Other tools Adze Awl bone Axe Bannerstone Blade prismatic Bone tool Bow drill Burin Canoe Oar Pesse canoe Chopper tool Cleaver Denticulate tool Fire plough Fire-saw Hammerstone Knife Microlith Quern-stone Racloir Rope Scraper side Stone tool Tally stick Weapons Wheel illustration   Architecture Ceremonial Göbekli Tepe Kiva Standing stones megalith row Stonehenge Pyramid Dwellings Neolithic architecture British megalith architecture Nordic megalith architecture Burdei Cave Cliff dwelling Dugout Hut Quiggly hole Jacal Longhouse Mud brick Mehrgarh Neolithic long house Pit-house Pueblitos Pueblo Rock shelter Blombos Cave Abri de la Madeleine Sibudu Cave Stone roof Roundhouse Stilt house Alp pile dwellings Wattle and daub Water management Check dam Cistern Flush toilet Reservoir Water well Other architecture Archaeological features Broch Burnt mound fulacht fiadh Causewayed enclosure Tor enclosure Circular enclosure Goseck Cursus Henge Thornborough Oldest buildings Megalithic architectural elements Midden Timber circle Timber trackway Sweet Track   Arts and culture Material goods Baskets Beadwork Beds Chalcolithic Clothing/textiles timeline Cosmetics Glue Hides shoes Ötzi Jewelry amber use Mirrors Pottery Cardium Grooved ware Linear Jōmon Unstan ware Sewing needle Weaving Wine Winery wine press Prehistoric art Art of the Upper Paleolithic Art of the Middle Paleolithic Blombos Cave List of Stone Age art Bird stone Bradshaw rock paintings Cairn Carved Stone Balls Cave paintings painting pigment Cup and ring mark Geoglyph Golden hats Guardian stones Megalithic art Petroform Petroglyph Petrosomatoglyph Pictogram Rock art Stone carving Sculpture Statue menhir Stone circle list British Isles and Brittany Venus figurines Burial Burial mounds Bowl barrow Round barrow Mound Builders culture U.S. sites Chamber tomb Severn-Cotswold Cist Dartmoor kistvaens Clava cairn Court tomb Cremation Dolmen Great dolmen Funeral pyre Gallery grave transepted wedge-shaped Grave goods Jar burial Long barrow unchambered Grønsalen Megalithic tomb Mummy Passage grave Rectangular dolmen Ring cairn Simple dolmen Stone box grave Tor cairn Tumulus Unchambered long cairn Other cultural Astronomy sites lunar calendar Behavioral modernity Origin of language Prehistoric medicine trepanning Evolutionary musicology music archaeology Prehistoric music Alligator drum flutes Divje Babe flute gudi Prehistoric numerals Origin of religion Paleolithic religion Prehistoric religion Spiritual drug use Prehistoric warfare Symbols symbolism Authority control GND: 4140148-7 NDL: 01116882 Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Paleolithic&oldid=719046333" Categories: Paleolithic Pleistocene Hidden categories: Pages using citations with accessdate and no URL CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list CS1 maint: Multiple names: editors list Articles with inconsistent citation formats Articles to be expanded from November 2014 All articles to be expanded Articles using small message boxes Articles lacking reliable references from February 2010 All articles lacking reliable references All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from April 2014 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from March 2013 All articles that may contain original research Articles that may contain original research from June 2014 Wikipedia articles with GND identifiers Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Article Talk Variants Views Read Edit View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Featured content Current events Random article Donate to Wikipedia Wikipedia store Interaction Help About Wikipedia Community portal Recent changes Contact page Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Cite this page Print/export Create a book Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Languages Alemannisch العربية Asturianu Azərbaycanca বাংলা Башҡортса Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца)‎ Български Boarisch Bosanski Brezhoneg Català Чӑвашла Čeština Corsu Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Frysk Gaeilge Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Íslenska Italiano עברית Basa Jawa ქართული Қазақша Кыргызча Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Limburgs Magyar Македонски Bahasa Melayu Монгол မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Oʻzbekcha/ўзбекча Polski Português Română Русский Shqip Sicilianu Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Basa Sunda Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் Татарча/tatarça ไทย Türkçe Türkmençe Українська اردو Vèneto Tiếng Việt West-Vlams Winaray 粵語 中文 Edit links This page was last modified on 7 May 2016, at 07:44. Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view