Music genre - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Music genre From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to: navigation, search This article has multiple issues. Please help improve it (see how) or discuss these issues on the talk page. The examples and perspective in this article may not represent a worldwide view of the subject. Please improve this article and discuss the issue on the talk page. (March 2012) This article possibly contains original research. Please improve it by verifying the claims made and adding inline citations. Statements consisting only of original research should be removed. (August 2014) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) A music genre is a conventional category that identifies some pieces of music as belonging to a shared tradition or set of conventions.[1] It is to be distinguished from musical form and musical style, although in practice these terms are sometimes used interchangeably.[2][not in citation given] Music can be divided into different genres in many different ways. The artistic nature of music means that these classifications are often subjective and controversial, and some genres may overlap. There are even varying academic definitions of the term genre itself. In his book Form in Tonal Music, Douglass M. Green distinguishes between genre and form. He lists madrigal, motet, canzona, ricercar, and dance as examples of genres from the Renaissance period. To further clarify the meaning of genre, Green writes, "Beethoven's Op. 61 and Mendelssohn's Op. 64 are identical in genre – both are violin concertos – but different in form. However, Mozart's Rondo for Piano, K. 511, and the Agnus Dei from his Mass, K. 317 are quite different in genre but happen to be similar in form."[3] Some, like Peter van der Merwe, treat the terms genre and style as the same, saying that genre should be defined as pieces of music that share a certain style or "basic musical language."[4] Others, such as Allan F. Moore, state that genre and style are two separate terms, and that secondary characteristics such as subject matter can also differentiate between genres.[5] A music genre or subgenre may also be defined by the musical techniques, the style, the cultural context, and the content and spirit of the themes. Geographical origin is sometimes used to identify a music genre, though a single geographical category will often include a wide variety of subgenres. Timothy Laurie argues that since the early 1980s, "genre has graduated from being a subset of popular music studies to being an almost ubiquitous framework for constituting and evaluating musical research objects".[6] Among the criteria often used to classify musical genres are the trichotomy of art, popular, and traditional musics. Contents 1 The art/popular/traditional distinction 1.1 Art music 1.2 Popular music 1.3 Traditional music 1.4 Critics of the axiomatic triangle 1.5 Automatic categorization 2 Emergence of new genres and subgenres 3 See also 4 References 5 Further reading The art/popular/traditional distinction[edit] Musicologists have sometimes classified music according to a trichotomic distinction such as Philip Tagg's "axiomatic triangle consisting of 'folk', 'art' and 'popular' musics".[7] He explains that each of these three is distinguishable from the others according to certain criteria.[7] Art music[edit] Main article: Art music See also: List of art music traditions The term art music refers primarily to classical traditions, including both contemporary and historical classical music forms. Art music exists in many parts of the world. It emphasizes formal styles that invite technical and detailed deconstruction[8] and criticism, and demand focused attention from the listener. In Western practice, art music is considered primarily a written musical tradition,[9] preserved in some form of music notation rather than being transmitted orally, by rote, or in recordings, as popular and traditional music usually are.[9][10] Historically, most western art music has been written down using the standard forms of music notation that evolved in Europe, beginning well before the Renaissance and reaching its maturity in the Romantic period. The identity of a "work" or "piece" of art music is usually defined by the notated version rather than by a particular performance, and is primarily associated with the composer rather than the performer (though composers may leave performers with some opportunity for interpretation or improvisation). This is so particularly in the case of western classical music. Art music may include certain forms of jazz, though some feel that jazz is primarily a form of popular music. Sacred Christian music forms an important part of the classical music tradition and repertoire, but can also be considered to have an identity of its own.[citation needed] Popular music[edit] Main article: Popular music The term popular music refers to any musical style accessible to the general public and disseminated by the mass media. Musicologist and popular music specialist Philip Tagg defined the notion in the light of sociocultural and economical aspects: Popular music, unlike art music, is (1) conceived for mass distribution to large and often socioculturally heterogeneous groups of listeners, (2) stored and distributed in non-written form, (3) only possible in an industrial monetary economy where it becomes a commodity and (4) in capitalist societies, subject to the laws of 'free' enterprise ... it should ideally sell as much as possible.[7] Popular music is found on most commercial radio stations, in most commercial music retailers and department stores, and in movie and television soundtracks. It is noted on the Billboard charts and, in addition to singer-songwriters and composers, it involves music producers more than other genres do. The distinction between classical and popular music has sometimes been blurred in marginal areas[11] such as minimalist music and light classics. Background music for films/movies often draws on both traditions. In this respect music is like fiction, which likewise draws a distinction between literary fiction and popular fiction that is not always precise. Traditional music[edit] Main article: Traditional music Traditional music is a modern name for what has been called "folk music", excluding the expansion of the term folk music to include much non-traditional material. Sometimes "folk" is designated for Western music and non-Western music is considered "world music". The two are both unified as traditional music due to: Oral transmission: The music is handed down and learned through singing, listening, and sometimes dancing; Cultural basis: The music derives from and is part of the traditions of a particular region or culture. Critics of the axiomatic triangle[edit] Musicologist and popular music specialist Richard Middleton has discussed the blurred nature of these distinctions: Neat divisions between 'folk' and 'popular', and 'popular' and 'art', are impossible to find ... arbitrary criteria [are used] to define the complement of 'popular'. 'Art' music, for example, is generally regarded as by nature complex, difficult, demanding; 'popular' music then has to be defined as 'simple', 'accessible', 'facile'. But many pieces commonly thought of as 'art' (Handel's 'Hallelujah Chorus', many Schubert songs, many Verdi arias) have qualities of simplicity; conversely, it is by no means obvious that the Sex Pistols' records were 'accessible', Frank Zappa's work 'simple', or Billie Holiday's 'facile'.[12] Automatic categorization[edit] This section requires expansion. (February 2014) Automatic methods of musical similarity detection, based on data mining and co-occurrence analysis, have been developed in order to classify music titles for electronic music distribution.[13] Emergence of new genres and subgenres[edit] New genres can arise by the development of new forms and styles of music and also simply by creating a new categorization. Although it is conceivable to create a musical style with no relation to existing genres, new styles usually appear under the influence of preexisting genres. The genealogy of musical genres expresses, often in the form of a written chart, the way in which new genres have developed under the influence of older ones. If two or more existing genres influence the emergence of a new one, a fusion between them can be said to have taken place. The proliferation of popular music in the 20th century has led to over 1,200 definable subgenres of music.[14] See also[edit] Composition school Genealogy of musical genres List of music styles List of popular music genres List of radio formats References[edit] ^ Samson, Jim. "Genre". In Grove Music Online. Oxford Music Online. Accessed March 4, 2012. ^ Janice Wong (2011). "Visualising Music: The Problems with Genre Classification". http://mastersofmedia.hum.uva.nl/2011/04/26/visualising-music-the-problems-with-genre-classification/.  External link in |website= (help); Missing or empty |url= (help) ^ Green, Douglass M. (1965). Form in Tonal Music. Holt, Rinehart, and Winston, Inc. p. 1. ISBN 0-03-020286-8.  ^ van der Merwe, Peter (1989). Origins of the Popular Style: The Antecedents of Twentieth-Century Popular Music. Oxford: Clarendon Press. p. 3. ISBN 0-19-316121-4.  ^ Moore, Allan F. "Categorical Conventions in Music Discourse: Style and Genre". Music & Letters, Vol. 82, No. 3 (Aug. 2001), pp. 432–442. ^ Laurie, Timothy (2014). "Music Genre As Method". Cultural Studies Review.  20 (2), pp. 283-292. ^ a b c Tagg, Philip. "Analysing Popular Music: Theory, Method and Practice". Popular Music 2 (1982): 41. ^ Siron, Jacques. "Musique Savante (Serious Music)". Dictionnaire des mots de la musique (Paris: Outre Mesure): 242. ^ a b Arnold, Denis: "Art Music, Art Song", in The New Oxford Companion to Music, Volume 1: A-J (Oxford and New York: Oxford University Press, 1983): 111. ^ Tagg, Philip. "Analysing Popular Music: Theory, Method and Practice". Popular Music 2 (1982): 37–67, here 41–42. ^ Arnold, Denis (1983): "Art Music, Art Song", in The New Oxford Companion to Music, Volume 1: A-J, Oxford University Press, p. 111, ISBN 0-19-311316-3. ^ Middleton, Richard (1990). Studying Popular Music. Open University Press. ISBN 978-0-335-15275-9.  ^ Pachet, François; Westermann, Geert; Laigre, Damien. "Musical Data Mining for Electronic Music Distribution". Proceedings of the 1st WedelMusic Conferencesou, pp. 101-106, Firenze, Italy, 2001. ^ Fitzpatrick, Rob (September 4, 2014). "From Charred Death to Deep Filthstep: The 1,264 Genres That Make Modern Music". The Guardian. Guardian Media Group.  Further reading[edit] Holt, Fabian (2007). Genre in Popular Music. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.  Negus, Keith (1999). Music Genres and Corporate Cultures. New York: Routledge. ISBN 0-415-17399-X.  Starr, Larry; Waterman, Christopher Alan (2010). American popular music from minstrelsy to MP3. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-539630-0.  v t e Lists of music genres and styles Music styles A–F G–M N–R S–Z Cultural and regional Genres and movements Brass & Military Children's Classical and art music traditions European classical music Opera Electronic Ambient Breakbeat Drum and bass Electro Electroacoustic Electronica EDM Eurodance Hardcore Hardstyle Mákina Hi-NRG House Chicago Electro Moombahton Ghetto Hard Microhouse Industrial Rock Alternative dance Synthpop Techno Trance Goa Hard Psychedelic Uplifting Trip hop UK garage Dubstep Grime Folk Traditional Religious Stage & Screen Cabaret Music Hall Musical Soundtrack Popular Blues Country Bluegrass Rock Dance Disco Electronic Funk Hip hop East Coast Midwest Southern West Coast Jazz Afro-Cuban Dixieland Fusion Acid jazz Jazz rap Smooth jazz Modal West Coast Latin Pop C-pop Europop Reggae R&B Rock Alternative Britpop Post-Britpop Grunge Post-grunge Indie rock Indie pop Dunedin Sound Post-punk revival Metal Extreme Black Death Doom Thrash Glam Grindcore Industrial Metalcore Nu Power Progressive Progressive Psychedelic Punk Anarcho Folk Hardcore Post-hardcore Emo Screamo Ska Soul v t e Music History of music and Classical history Prehistoric Ancient Religious Biblical Classical music Medieval Renaissance Baroque Classical period Romantic Impressionist 20th century Contemporary 21st century Traditional music Blues Country music Jazz Folk music Popular music Hip-hop music Pop music Soul music Rock music Heavy metal music Punk rock Performance Ensembles Choir Concert band Conducting Instrumentalist Musical ensemble Musician Orchestra Rhythm section Singer Lead singer Backup singer Theory Composition Form Genre Notation Composer Improvisation Songwriter Education and study Bachelor of Music Master of Music Doctor of Musical Arts PhD Music education Music history Music psychology Cultural aspects Musicology Ethnomusicology Ecomusicology Production Musician Performance Band (rock or pop) Backing band All-female band Rhythm section Big band Conducting DJ Lyrics Song Single A-side and B-side EP Cover Remix Album compilation live remix Audio engineer Record label Record producer Sampling Music technology (electric) Music technology (electronic and digital) Microphone Sound recording Cultural and regional genres African Central East North Southern West Asian Central East Middle Eastern South Southeast European Central Eastern Northern Southeastern Southern Western Latin American Central American South American North American Caribbean Oceanian Melanesian Micronesian Polynesian By sovereign state     Afghanistan Albania Algeria Andorra Angola Antigua and Barbuda Argentina Armenia Australia Austria Azerbaijan Bahamas Bahrain Bangladesh Barbados Belarus Belgium Belize Benin Bhutan Bolivia Bosnia and Herzegovina Botswana Brazil Brunei Bulgaria Burkina Faso Burundi Cambodia Cameroon Canada Cape Verde Central African Republic Chad Chile China Colombia Comoros Costa Rica Croatia Cuba Cyprus Czech Republic Democratic Republic of the Congo Denmark Djibouti Dominica Dominican Republic East Timor Ecuador Egypt El Salvador Equatorial Guinea Eritrea Estonia Ethiopia Federated States of Micronesia Fiji Finland France Gabon Gambia Georgia Germany Ghana Greece Grenada Guatemala Guinea Guinea-Bissau Guyana Haiti Honduras Hungary Iceland India Indonesia Iran Iraq Ireland Israel Italy Ivory Coast Jamaica Japan Jordan Kazakhstan Kenya Kiribati Kuwait Kyrgyzstan Laos Latvia Lebanon Lesotho Liberia Libya Liechtenstein Lithuania Luxembourg Madagascar Malawi Malaysia Maldives Mali Malta Marshall Islands Mauritania Mauritius Mexico Moldova Monaco Mongolia Montenegro Morocco Mozambique Myanmar Namibia Nauru Nepal Netherlands New Zealand Nicaragua Niger Nigeria North Korea Norway Oman Pakistan Palau Panama Papua New Guinea Paraguay Peru Philippines Poland Portugal Qatar Republic of Macedonia Republic of the Congo Romania Russia Rwanda Saint Kitts and Nevis Saint Lucia Saint Vincent and the Grenadines Samoa San Marino São Tomé and Príncipe Saudi Arabia Senegal Serbia Seychelles Sierra Leone Singapore Slovakia Slovenia Solomon Islands Somalia South Africa South Korea Spain Sri Lanka Sudan Suriname Swaziland Sweden Switzerland Syria Taiwan Tajikistan Tanzania Thailand Togo Tonga Trinidad and Tobago Tunisia Turkey Turkmenistan Tuvalu Uganda Ukraine United Arab Emirates United Kingdom United States Uruguay Uzbekistan Vanuatu Vatican City Venezuela Vietnam Yemen Zambia Zimbabwe Lists Index Outline Terminology Instruments Musical forms by era Cultural and regional genres Popular music genres Albums Songs Jazz and popular music glossary Audio See also Musical instrument Music festival Music therapy Music and politics Women and music Category Portal WikiProject Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Music_genre&oldid=716985275" Categories: Music genres Hidden categories: CS1 errors: external links Pages using web citations with no URL Wikipedia indefinitely move-protected pages Use mdy dates from November 2012 Articles with limited geographic scope from March 2012 Articles that may contain original research from August 2014 All articles that may contain original research All articles with failed verification Articles with failed verification from December 2014 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from March 2016 Articles to be expanded from February 2014 All articles to be expanded Articles using small message boxes Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Article Talk Variants Views Read Edit View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Featured content Current events Random article Donate to Wikipedia Wikipedia store Interaction Help About Wikipedia Community portal Recent changes Contact page Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Cite this page Print/export Create a book Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Languages العربية Asturianu Azərbaycanca বাংলা Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto فارسی Français Frysk Gaeilge Galego 한국어 Հայերեն Hrvatski Íslenska Italiano עברית Latviešu Lietuvių Македонски Nāhuatl Português Română Русский Scots Sicilianu Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina کوردیی ناوەندی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Tagalog ไทย Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt ייִדיש 中文 Edit links This page was last modified on 25 April 2016, at 01:55. Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view