Drake University - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Drake University From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to: navigation, search Drake University Motto Veritas Motto in English Truth Type Private coeducational Established 1881 Endowment $185 million President Earl F. "Marty" Martin[1] Administrative staff 362 Undergraduates 3,164 Postgraduates 2,057 Location Des Moines, Iowa, U.S. Campus Urban, 150 acres (0.5 km²) Colors Blue and White           Athletics NCAA Division I MVC, Pioneer Football League, MAAC Nickname Bulldogs Mascot Spike Affiliations NAICU[2] CIC Website www.drake.edu Drake University is a private, co-educational university located in Des Moines, Iowa, United States. The institution offers a number of undergraduate and graduate programs, as well as professional programs in business, law and pharmacy. Drake's law school is among the twenty-five oldest in the country. Contents 1 History 2 Academics 2.1 Rankings 3 Housing 4 Student life 5 Athletics 5.1 History 5.2 Drake Relays 5.3 Fight Song 6 Notable alumni 7 See also 8 References 9 External links History[edit] Francis Marion Drake Old Main Drake University was founded in 1881 when most of the staff of Oskaloosa College, led by Francis Marion Drake, left that college to establish Drake University. Drake was originally affiliated with the Christian Church (Disciples of Christ) although no religious affiliation is officially recognized today. The first classes convened in 1881 with 77 students and one building constructed, Student’s Home. In 1883 the first permanent building, Old Main, was completed. Old Main remains an important building on campus today housing administration offices, Levitt Hall, and Sheslow Auditorium; site of many United States Presidential Debates among other events. The university's law school, the second oldest law school in the country west of the Mississippi River after Saint Louis University School of Law, was established in 1865 by Chester C. Cole,[3] who served on the Iowa Supreme Court from 1864 to 1876. Drake’s first international students enrolled for classes in 1886 coming from China, Persia, Armenia, and Japan. The first campus library opened on June 16, 1908. In 1920, due to a housing crisis, the University allowed social fraternities to use Greek letter emblems and affiliate with national offices.[4] Drake's law school, one of the twenty-five oldest law schools in the nation, traces its history to 1865. It is a charter member of the Association of American Law Schools, has been accredited since 1923 when accreditation first began, and is one of only seventy-five ABA-approved law schools to have a Chapter of Order of the Coif. Drake University Law School is home to the American Judicature Society, the archives of the National Bar Association, the nation's oldest and largest national association of predominately African-American lawyers and judges, and the Drake Constitutional Law Center, which is one of only four constitutional law programs established by the U.S. Congress and funded by the federal government. In 1931, the first on-campus student residence built since the university’s founding opened-the women’s dorm. In 1937, ground was broken on commencement day for Cowles Library, which is today the university’s primary library. 1939 saw a new men's dorm completed which included a student union dubbed "The Kennel." The new center permitted smoking, the first official campus recognition of the "new fad." In 1963, Kirk Residence Hall opened, with Meredith Hall opening in 1965, opening the door for the College of Liberal Arts and the School of Journalism. During the height of nationwide student protests in 1970, a bomb exploded inside Harvey Ingham Hall. No one was injured, but windows were shattered in nearby Meredith, Fitch and Herriott halls. Ingham was decimated, but repaired. The largest building on campus, the Harmon Fine Arts Center would open in 1972 with the Olmsted Center, Drake’s student union building, opening in 1974. On September 17, 1969, the Drake student newspaper, The Times-Delphic [2], published what appears to be the first documented account of the famous Paul is dead hoax, written by Tim Harper. No articles published prior to this piece about the supposed death of Paul McCartney are known, although fellow Times-Delphic reporter and musician Dartanyan Brown, one of the sources for the article, recalled hearing about the hoax from other musicians and reading about it in some underground newspapers. In 1992, the William A. Knapp Center opened as home to the men's and women's basketball teams along with the women's volleyball team. It contains four racquetball courts, five basketball and volleyball courts, a 200-meter track and a weight training center. The facility hosted President Bill Clinton in 1996.[4] In September 2010, Drake launched the distinctlyDrake Campaign in order to meet the goals of "attracting and empowering the best and brightest students through $50 million for scholarship endowment, attracting and retaining the finest teachers, mentors and scholars through 26 endowed faculty positions at $26 million to $50 million, improving and enhancing physical facilities, technology and resources on campus through $50 million to $85 million worth of capital upgrades, broadening perspectives through innovative and expanded interdisciplinary centers through $15 million to $18 million investments, and build on collective financial strength through the Drake Fund through $3.5 million to $4 million per year".[5] When the campaign concluded in 2015, a total of $216,014,522 had been raised towards these efforts.[6] Academics[edit] The University consists of six colleges: College of Arts and Sciences College of Business and Public Administration School of Education School of Journalism and Mass Communication Law School College of Pharmacy and Health Sciences Rankings[edit] For the 2015-16 academic year, Drake University placed third in the midwest region of the U.S. News & World Report's rankings of master's universities. Among master’s institutions, Drake’s peer-assessed academic quality ranks third of 149 in the Midwest and seventh of 542 in the nation.[7] Forbes magazine ranked Drake University at number 145 on their 2015 list of America's Top Colleges.[8] CollegeFactual ranked the school 171st nationally and second in the state of Iowa.[9] Housing[edit] The University provides the following on-campus living accommodations for undergraduate students: Stalnaker Hall (First-Year only) Carpenter Hall (First-Year only) Herriott Hall (First-Year only) Crawford Hall (First-Year only) Morehouse (First-Year/Upperclassmen) Jewett Hall (Upperclassmen only) Goodwin-Kirk Hall (Upperclassmen only) Ross Hall (Upperclassmen only) Students are required to live on campus for their first two years at Drake. This excludes non-traditional students who take time off between high school and matriculation. Most students choose to live off campus during their final two years. In 2006, Drake University and Hubbell Realty leaders began a $34-million housing and retail development at 30th Street and Carpenter Avenue. The Drake West Village development created 7,000 feet of retail space for street-level neighborhood businesses and upper floors for state-of-the-art student suites. The buildings house up to 500 students in a mix of one-, two- and four-bedroom units, where each student has a private bedroom and shares a common living and kitchen space. The housing is targeted at junior and senior undergraduate students and graduate students in the pharmacy program or the Drake Law School and does not house non-students. Student life[edit] Drake features over 160 student organizations in which to participate, which include several fraternities and sororities. The School of Journalism and Mass Communication's (SJMC) magazine program has achieved national prominence. The Accrediting Council on Education in Journalism and Mass Communication (ACEJMC) team that visited in 1999 called the SJMC a “real standout” and termed Drake's Magazines program the strongest undergraduate sequence in the country. Drake student magazines THiNK and 515 won 2007 Pacemaker awards in Washington, D.C. The School of Journalism and Mass Communication is also home to 94.1 The Dog, which operates under the call letters KDRA-LP FM. The station launched in August 2006 after having existed as an internet station, KDCS Bulldog Radio. 94.1 The Dog is broadcast at 80 watts from a tower atop Meredith Hall, the home of Drake's SJMC. An agreement with the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) allows Drake to utilize the frequency from 4 p.m. to 4 a.m. weekdays and all day Saturday, while Grand View University controls the frequency the rest of the week under the call letters KGVC-LP. Drake students schedule 24 hours of programming under "The Dog," broadcasting online and on channel 12 on closed-circuit television on campus even when not broadcasting on the frequency. Athletics[edit] Drake Athletics wordmark Main article: Drake Bulldogs Drake student-athletes compete in NCAA Division I in the Missouri Valley Conference in all sports except football. In football, Drake competes in the FCS NCAA Division I Pioneer Football League. In crew, Drake competes in the Metro Atlantic Athletic Conference. Basketball (men's and women's) Crew (women's) Cross-country (men's and women's) Football (men's) Golf (men's and women's) Soccer (men's and women's) Softball (women's) Tennis (men's and women's) Track & Field (men's and women's) Volleyball (women's) History[edit] Drake has an extensive sports history. In 1885, baseball became the University’s first varsity sport, followed by football and track. Drake’s first football field, Haskins Field, opened on October 11, 1905 with a 17-0 loss to Iowa. In 1904, Drake organized a basketball team, but Mary Carpenter, the first Dean of Women, banned the team as “not appropriate for women.” Nearly 70 years later, the university would establish a department of Women’s Intercollegiate Athletics. The athletic teams received their nickname of Bulldogs in 1904 from a sportswriter who noticed that John L. Griffith, who coached every sport, was bringing his pet bulldogs to the practice fields. The teams had previously been known as the Ducklings and Ganders. Drake’s football history continued on 1928 when Drake defeated Simpson College 41-6 in what is believed to be the first night football game west of the Mississippi River. Perhaps the most famous incident in Drake’s football history is known as the Johnny Bright Incident, where Pulitzer-Prize winning photographs in the Des Moines Register proved an intentional attack on the African American quarterback by Oklahoma State Cowboys football players. Drake's men's basketball team reached the Final Four of the NCAA Tournament in 1969. Top-seeded UCLA Bruins men's basketball and its 7-foot megastar Lew Alcindor (later Kareem Abdul-Jabbar) barely escaped an upset in the national semifinals, 85-82. In 1981, senior Lewis Lloyd, the nation's second-leading scorer in Division I men's basketball, was named a first-team All-American. Drafted by the Houston Rockets, Lloyd went on to an eight-year NBA career.[4] In the first year of the NCAA women's basketball tournament in 1982, Drake came one step away from the Final Four. Drake Relays[edit] Main article: Drake Relays Drake’s most famous event, the Drake Relays, began in 1910 in a blizzard with fewer than 100 participants. In 1935 Jesse Owens set an American broad jump record (26-1-3/4) at the Drake Relays. Today, the Drake Relays draws athletes from all over the world, including olympians.[10] Students kick-off the Relays in the annual tradition of Street Painting, in which student organizations colorfully decorate areas of Carpenter Avenue near the center of campus under a common theme. Fight Song[edit] The fight song for Drake University is The "D" Song. The lyrics are: Here's to the one who wears the "D", Makes a good fight for varsity, Here's to those who've fought and won, Made a good fight as a true Drake alum, Here's to the one who's brave and bold, Ready to battle like days of old, Fights like a Bulldog for victory, Oh, here's to the one who wears the "D". Notable alumni[edit] Main article: List of Drake University alumni See also[edit] Universities portal Drake University Campus Historic District, listed on the National Register of Historic Places References[edit] ^ http://news.drake.edu/2014/03/12/drake-university-president-david-maxwell-will-retire-in-june-2015/ ^ NAICU – Member Directory ^ [1][dead link] ^ a b c "History & Traditions - Drake University". Drake.edu. Retrieved 2013-01-25.  ^ "Drake launches campaign to become national leader in higher education | Newsroom | Drake University". News.drake.edu. 2010-09-30. Retrieved 2013-01-25.  ^ "distinctlyDrake". Drake University. Retrieved 16 April 2016.  ^ http://news.drake.edu/2015/09/09/drake-university-ranks-third-in-u-s-news-and-world-report-2016-rankings/ ^ http://www.forbes.com/colleges/drake-university/ ^ http://www.collegefactual.com/colleges/drake-university/ ^ "Drake hopeful of drawing fans, huge 2016 events". TheGazette. Retrieved 2013-01-25.  External links[edit] Wikisource has the text of the 1920 Encyclopedia Americana article Drake University. Official website Official athletics website Drake Relays Digital Archive A historic look at one of America's oldest annual Track & Field events. Drake University Yearbooks Coordinates: 41°36′4″N 93°39′8″W﻿ / ﻿41.60111°N 93.65222°W﻿ / 41.60111; -93.65222 v t e Drake University Academics President: Earl F. "Marty" Martin Law School College of Pharmacy and Health Sciences Notable Alumni Campus Drake University Campus Historic District Drake Stadium Knapp Center Athletics Drake Relays Football Men's basketball Women's basketball Men's Soccer v t e Colleges and universities in Iowa Public institutions Iowa State University University of Iowa University of Northern Iowa Private institutions AIB College of Business Ashford Briar Cliff Buena Vista Central Clarke Coe Cornell Des Moines Divine Word Dordt Drake Emmaus Bible Faith Baptist Graceland Grand View Grinnell Iowa Wesleyan Loras Luther Maharishi Morningside Mount Mercy Northwestern St. Ambrose Simpson University of Dubuque Upper Iowa Waldorf Wartburg William Penn v t e Des Moines, Iowa People from Des Moines, Iowa About Education Geography Des Moines River Greater Des Moines Skyline Raccoon River History Fort Des Moines Timeline Media The Des Moines Register Radio Television Transportation DART Des Moines International Airport I-235 Neighborhoods Beaverdale Chautauqua Park Downtown Dogtown East Village Highland Park Prospect Park Riverbend Riverview Park Sherman Hill Culture and attractions 80/35 Music Festival Adventureland Ballet Des Moines Blank Park Zoo Civic Center of Greater Des Moines Des Moines Art Center Des Moines Arts Festival Des Moines Metro Opera Des Moines Public Library Des Moines Symphony George Washington Carver Bridge Greater Des Moines Botanical Garden Hinterland Music Festival Iowa Events Center Iowa State Capitol Iowa State Fair Iowa State Fairgrounds Living History Farms Prairie Meadows Principal Park Terrace Hill Wells Fargo Arena Water Works Park Western Gateway Park Higher education and research AIB College of Business Des Moines University DMACC Drake University Grand View University Iowa Primate Learning Sanctuary State Historical Society of Iowa Sports Des Moines Buccaneers Des Moines Marathon Des Moines Menace Drake University Bulldogs Drake Relays Iowa Barnstormers Iowa Cubs Iowa Energy Iowa Wild Principal Charity Classic Des Moines metropolitan area · Iowa · United States v t e Missouri Valley Conference Members Bradley Braves Drake Bulldogs Evansville Purple Aces Illinois State Redbirds Indiana State Sycamores Loyola Ramblers Missouri State Bears and Lady Bears Northern Iowa Panthers Southern Illinois Salukis Wichita State Shockers Associate members Arkansas–Little Rock Trojans (women's swimming & diving) Central Arkansas Bears (men's soccer) Dallas Baptist Patriots (baseball) Hartford Hawks (men's tennis) SIU Edwardsville Cougars (men's soccer) Stony Brook Seawolves (men's tennis) UMBC Retrievers (men's tennis) Championships & awards Baseball Tournament Men's Basketball Tournament (Arch Madness) Women's Basketball Tournament Men's Soccer Tournament Hall of Fame v t e Pioneer Football League Current members Butler Bulldogs Campbell Fighting Camels Davidson Wildcats Dayton Flyers Drake Bulldogs Jacksonville Dolphins Marist Red Foxes Morehead State Eagles San Diego Toreros Stetson Hatters Valparaiso Crusaders Former members Austin Peay Governors Mercer Bears v t e Metro Atlantic Athletic Conference Full members Canisius Golden Griffins Fairfield Stags Iona Gaels Manhattan Jaspers/Lady Jaspers Marist Red Foxes Monmouth Hawks Niagara Purple Eagles Quinnipiac Bobcats Rider Broncs Siena Saints Saint Peter's Peacocks/Peahens Associate members Albany Great Danes (women's golf) Detroit Titans (men's lacrosse) Drake Bulldogs (women's rowing) Hartford Hawks (women's golf) Jacksonville Dolphins (men's and women's rowing) Robert Morris Colonials (women's rowing) Sacred Heart Pioneers (women's rowing) St. Francis Brooklyn Terriers (women's water polo) Villanova Wildcats (women's water polo) VMI Keydets (women's water polo) Wagner Seahawks (women's water polo) Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Drake_University&oldid=715481962" Categories: Drake University Educational institutions established in 1881 Visitor attractions in Des Moines, Iowa Buildings and structures in Des Moines, Iowa 1881 establishments in Iowa Hidden categories: All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from January 2013 Coordinates on Wikidata Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Article Talk Variants Views Read Edit View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Featured content Current events Random article Donate to Wikipedia Wikipedia store Interaction Help About Wikipedia Community portal Recent changes Contact page Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Cite this page Print/export Create a book Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Languages فارسی Svenska Edit links This page was last modified on 16 April 2016, at 02:29. Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view