Canadian French - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Canadian French From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to: navigation, search It has been suggested that this article be merged with French language in Canada. (Discuss) Proposed since May 2015. Canadian French français canadien Native to Canada (primarily Quebec, Ontario and New Brunswick, but present throughout the country); smaller numbers in emigrant communities in New England Native speakers 7,300,000 (2011 census)[1] Language family Indo-European Italic Romance Western Gallo-Romance Oïl French Canadian French Official status Official language in Canada Quebec New Brunswick Recognised minority language in Ontario Maine New Hampshire New York Vermont Language codes ISO 639-3 – Glottolog None IETF fr-CA Canadian French (French: français canadien) is the various varieties of a French language spoken in Canada. In 2005, the total number of speakers of French in Canada (including two million non-fluent speakers) was 12,000,000.[2] In 2011, French was reported as the mother tongue of more than seven million Canadians, or around 22% of the national population.[3] At the federal level it has official status alongside English. At the provincial level of government, French is the sole official language of Quebec and is one of two official languages of New Brunswick, and is jointly official (derived from its federal legal status) in Nunavut, Yukon, and the Northwest Territories. Government services are offered in French at the provincial level in Manitoba, in certain areas of Ontario (through the French Language Services Act), and to a variable extent elsewhere. New England French, a variety spoken in parts of New England in the United States, is essentially a variety of Canadian French.[4] Contents 1 Varieties 1.1 Sub-varieties 2 Historical usage 3 See also 4 Notes and references 4.1 Notes 4.2 References 5 Further reading 6 External links Varieties[edit] Quebec French is spoken in Quebec. Closely related varieties are spoken by francophone communities in Ontario, Western Canada, Labrador and in the New England region of the United States and differ from Quebec French primarily by their greater conservatism. The term Laurentian French has limited application as a collective label for all these varieties, and Quebec French has also been used for the entire dialect group. The overwhelming majority of francophone Canadians speak this dialect. Acadian French is spoken by over 350,000 Acadians in parts of the Maritime Provinces, Newfoundland, the Îles de la Madeleine, and Gaspé peninsula.[5] Métis French is spoken in Manitoba and Western Canada by the Métis, descendants of First Nations mothers and voyageur fathers during the fur trade. Many Métis spoke Cree in addition to French, and over the years they developed a unique mixed language called Michif by combining Métis French nouns, numerals, articles and adjectives with Cree verbs, demonstratives, postpositions, interrogatives and pronouns. Both the Michif language and the Métis dialect of French are severely endangered. Newfoundland French is spoken by a small population on the Port-au-Port Peninsula of Newfoundland. It is endangered — both Quebec French and Acadian French are now more widely spoken among Newfoundland francophones than the distinctive peninsular dialect. Brayon French is spoken in the Beauce of Quebec; Edmunston, New Brunswick; and Madawaska, Maine. Although superficially a phonological descendant of Acadian French, analysis reveals it is morphosyntactically identical to Quebec French.[6] It is believed to have resulted from a localized levelling of contact dialects between Québécois and Acadian settlers. New England French is spoken in parts of New England in the United States. Essentially a local variant of Quebec French, it is one of three major forms of French that developed in what is now the U.S., the others being Louisiana French and the nearly-extinct Missouri French. It is endangered, though its use is supported by bilingual education programs in place since 1987.[4] Sub-varieties[edit] There are two main sub-varieties of Canadian French. Joual is an informal variety of French spoken in working-class neighbourhoods in the province of Quebec. Chiac is a blending of Acadian French syntax and vocabulary with numerous lexical borrowings from English. Historical usage[edit] The term Canadian French was formerly used to refer specifically to Quebec French and the closely related varieties of Ontario and Western Canada descended from it.[7] This is presumably because Canada and Acadia were distinct parts of New France, and also of British North America, until 1867. However, today the term Canadian French is not usually deemed to exclude Acadian French. Phylogenetically, Quebec French, Métis French and Brayon French are representatives of koiné French in the Americas whereas Acadian French, Cajun French, and Newfoundland French are derivatives of non-koinesized local dialects in France.[8] See also[edit] Canada portal French language and French-speaking world portal Official bilingualism in Canada French Canadian French language in Canada Languages of Canada French language in the United States Metis French Michif language Quebec French Notes and references[edit] Notes[edit] ^ French (Canada) at Ethnologue (18th ed., 2015) ^ [1] ^ "2011 Census of Canada". ^ a b Ammon, Ulrich; International Sociological Association (1989). Status and Function of Languages and Language Varieties. Walter de Gruyter. pp. 306–308. ISBN 0-89925-356-3. Retrieved February 1, 2012.  ^ Ethnologue report for Canada ^ Geddes, James (1908). Study of the Acadian-French language spoken on the north shore of the Baie-des-Chaleurs. Halle: Niemeyer; Wittmann, Henri (1995) "Grammaire comparée des variétés coloniales du français populaire de Paris du 17e siècle et origines du français québécois." in Fournier, Robert & Henri Wittmann. Le français des Amériques. Trois-Rivières: Presses universitaires de Trois-Rivières, 281–334.[2] ^ Francard and Latin, in Le régionalisme lexical, write: "Le français du Québec a rayonné en Ontario et dans l'ouest du Canada, de même qu'en Nouvelle-Angleterre. [...] Le français québécois et le français acadien peuvent être regroupés sous l'appellation plus large de français canadien2, laquelle englobe aussi le français ontarien et le français de l'Ouest canadien. Ces deux derniers possèdent des traits caractéristiques qui leur sont propres aujourd'hui dans l'ensemble canadien et qui s'expliquent surtout par un phénomène de conservatisme, mais il s'agit de variétés qui sont historiquement des prolongements du français québécois. 2Il faut noter ici que le terme de «français canadien» avait autrefois un sens plus restreint, désignant le français du Québec et les variétés qui s'y rattachent directement, d'où l'emploi à cette époque de «canadianisme» pour parler d'un trait caractéristique du français du Québec." ^ Robert Fournier & Henri Wittmann. 1995. Le français des Amériques. Trois-Rivières: Presses universitaires de Trois-Rivières. References[edit] The lexical basis of grammatical borrowing: a Prince Edward Island French Language in Canada. Edwards, John R. Collective (2004). Canadian French for better travel. Montreal: Ulysses Travel Guides. ISBN 2-89464-720-4.  External link in |publisher= (help) Further reading[edit] Darnell, Regna, ed. (1971). Linguistic Diversity in Canadian Society, in Sociolinguistics Series, 1. Edmonton, Alta.: Linguistic Research. Without ISBN or SBN External links[edit] Audio example of Canadian French Look up canadian french in Wiktionary, the free dictionary. v t e Languages of Canada Official languages English French Indigenous languages Algonquian Abenaki Algonquin Blackfoot Cree Innu Malecite-Passamaquoddy Mi'kmaq Munsee Naskapi Ojibwe Ottawa Potawatomi Athabaskan Babine-Witsuwit'en Carrier Chilcotin Chipewyan Dogrib Gwich’in Hän Kaska Nicola Sarcee Sekani Slavey Tagish Tahltan Tutchone Inuit Inuinnaqtun Inuktitut Inupiaq Inuvialuktun Iroquoian Cayuga Mohawk Oneida Onondaga Seneca Tuscarora Wyandot Salishan Comox Halkomelem Lillooet Nuxalk Okanagan Saanich Sechelt Shuswap Squamish Thompson Tsimshianic Gitxsan Nisga'a Tsimshian Coast Southern Wakashan Ditidaht Haisla Heiltsuk-Oowekyala Kwak'wala Nuu-chah-nulth other Beothuk Haida Kutenai Tlingit Pidgins, creoles and mixed Broken Slavey Bungee Chiac Chinook Jargon Labrador Inuit Pidgin French Michif Sign languages American Sign Language Inuit Sign Language Maritime Sign Language Plains Indian Sign Language Quebec Sign Language Immigrant languages Gaelic Irish Ukrainian Russian German Hutterite Pennsylvania Plautdietsch v t e Varieties of the French language Africa Maghrebi African Asia Cambodian Indian Laotian Vietnamese Europe Meridional Standard Belgian Jersey Legal Swiss Aostan North America Canada Quebec Joual Brayon Acadian Chiac Newfoundland Métis United States Louisiana Cajun Colonial Missouri Muskrat New England Caribbean Haïtian Saint-Barthélemy Related French-based creole languages Michif v t e Romance languages (Classification)   Western Ibero-Romance Galician-Portuguese Portuguese dialects European Brazilian African Asian Creoles Galician Eonavian/Galician-Asturian Fala Judaeo-Portuguese Calão Astur-Leonese Asturian Cantabrian Extremaduran Leonese Mirandese Spanish Spanish dialects Latin American Philippine Equatoguinean European Creoles Old Spanish Judaeo-Spanish Caló Others Navarro-Aragonese Aragonese Judaeo-Aragonese Mozarabic Occitano- Romance Catalan dialects Eastern Catalan Alguerese Balearic Central Northern Western Catalan North-Western Valencian Judaeo-Catalan Catalan Caló Occitan Auvergnat Gascon Aranese Languedocien Limousin Provençal Niçard Mentonasc Vivaro-Alpine Old Provençal Judaeo-Provençal Gallo-Romance Langues d'oïl Burgundian Champenois Franc-Comtois French dialects Standard African Aostan Belgian Cambodian Canadian Indian Laotian Swiss Vietnamese Old French Middle French Judaeo-French Creoles Gallo Lorrain Norman Anglo-Norman Picard Poitevin Saintongeais Walloon Others Arpitan/Franco-Provençal Valdôtain Savoyard North Italian dialects Gallo-Italic Ligurian Brigasc Genoese Intemelio Monégasque Lombard Western Eastern Emilian-Romagnol Emilian Bolognese Parmigiano Romagnol Piedmontese Judaeo-Piedmontese Gallo-Italic of Sicily Gallo-Italic of Basilicata Others Venetian Fiuman Talian Triestine Rhaeto-Romance Rhaeto-Romance Friulian Ladin Romansh   Central, Sardinian and Eastern Italo-Dalmatian Italian Italian dialects Central Tuscan Corsican Gallurese Sassarese Judaeo-Italian Southern Italian Neapolitan Northern Calabrese Sicilian Southern Calabrese Others Dalmatian Istriot Sardinian Sardinian Sardinian Campidanese Logudorese Eastern Romanian Romanian Moldovan Vlach Others Aromanian Istro-Romanian Megleno-Romanian North African North African African Romance Italics indicate extinct languages Bold indicates languages with more than 5 million speakers Languages between parentheses are varieties of the language on their left. Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Canadian_French&oldid=715865075" Categories: French dialects French language in Canada Hidden categories: Language articles citing Ethnologue 18 Articles to be merged from May 2015 All articles to be merged Languages without Glottolog code Language articles with IETF language tag Dialects of languages with ISO 639-3 code Articles containing French-language text CS1 errors: external links Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Article Talk Variants Views Read Edit View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Featured content Current events Random article Donate to Wikipedia Wikipedia store Interaction Help About Wikipedia Community portal Recent changes Contact page Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Cite this page Print/export Create a book Download as PDF Printable version Languages Afrikaans العربية Corsu Español Français Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Português Simple English Suomi 粵語 中文 Edit links This page was last modified on 18 April 2016, at 12:13. Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view