ITU-T - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia ITU-T From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to: navigation, search The ITU Telecommunication Standardization Sector (ITU-T) is one of the three sectors (divisions or units) of the International Telecommunication Union (ITU); it coordinates standards for telecommunications. The standardization efforts of ITU commenced in 1865 with the formation of the International Telegraph Union (ITU). ITU became a United Nations specialized agency in 1947. The International Telegraph and Telephone Consultative Committee (CCITT, from French: Comité Consultatif International Téléphonique et Télégraphique) was created in 1956, and was renamed ITU-T in 1993.[1] ITU-T has a permanent secretariat, the Telecommunication Standardization Bureau (TSB), based at the ITU headquarters in Geneva, Switzerland. The current Director of the Bureau is Chaesub Lee, whose 4-year term commenced on 1 January 2015,[2] who replaced Malcolm Johnson of the United Kingdom, who was director from 1 January 2007 to 2014. Contents 1 Primary function 2 History 3 "Real time" standardization 3.1 Development of Recommendations 3.2 Approval of Recommendations 4 Series and Recommendations 4.1 Series of ITU Recommendations 4.2 International Telecommunication Regulations (ITRs) 4.3 Key standards published by ITU 5 Hot topics 6 See also 7 References 8 External links Primary function[edit] The ITU-T mission is to ensure the efficient and timely production of standards covering all fields of telecommunications on a worldwide basis, as well as defining tariff and accounting principles for international telecommunication services.[3] The international standards that are produced by the ITU-T are referred to as "Recommendations" (with the word ordinarily capitalized to distinguish its meaning from the ordinary sense of the word "recommendation"), as they become mandatory only when adopted as part of a national law. Since the ITU-T is part of the ITU, which is a United Nations specialized agency, its standards carry more formal international weight than those of most other standards development organizations that publish technical specifications of a similar form.[4] History[edit] Although the ITU itself dates back to 1865,[1] the formal standardization processes are more recent. Two consultative committees were created by the ITU’s 1925 Paris conference to deal with the complexities of the international telephone services (known as CCIF, as the French acronym) and long-distance telegraphy (CCIT).[5] In view of the basic similarity of many of the technical problems faced by the CCIF and CCIT, a decision was taken in 1956 to merge them to become the single International Telegraph and Telephone Consultative Committee (CCITT, in the French acronym).[5] In 1992, the Plenipotentiary Conference (the top policy-making conference of ITU) saw a reform of ITU, giving the Union greater flexibility to adapt to an increasingly complex, interactive and competitive environment. It was at this time that CCITT was renamed the Telecommunication Standardization Sector (ITU-T), as one of three Sectors of the Union alongside the Radiocommunication Sector (ITU-R) and the Telecommunication Development Sector (ITU-D).[6] Historically, the Recommendations of the CCITT were presented to four-yearly plenary assemblies for endorsement, and the full set of Recommendations were published after each plenary assembly. However, the delays in producing texts, and translating them into other working languages, did not suit the fast pace of change in the telecommunications industry.[7] "Real time" standardization[edit] The rise of the personal computer industry in the early 1980s created a new common practice among both consumers and businesses of adopting "bleeding edge" communications technology even if it was not yet standardized. Thus, standards organizations had to put forth standards much faster, or find themselves ratifying de facto standards after the fact. One of the most prominent examples of this was the Open Document Architecture project, which began in 1985 when a profusion of software firms around the world were still furiously competing to shape the future of the electronic office, and was completed in 1999 long after Microsoft Office's then-secret binary file formats had become established as the global de facto standard. The ITU-T now operates under much more streamlined processes. The time between an initial proposal of a draft document by a member company and the final approval of a full-status ITU-T Recommendation can now be as short as a few months (or less in some cases). This makes the standardization approval process in the ITU-T much more responsive to the needs of rapid technology development than in the ITU's historical past.[8] New and updated Recommendations are published on an almost daily basis, and much of the library of over 3,270 Recommendations is now free of charge online.[9][10][11] (Specifications jointly maintained by the ITU-T and ISO/IEC are not free.[12]) ITU-T has moreover tried to facilitate cooperation between the various forums and standard-developing organizations (SDOs). This collaboration is necessary to avoid duplication of work and the consequent risk of conflicting standards in the market place.[13] In the work of standardization, ITU-T cooperates with other SDOs, e.g., the International Organization for Standardization (ISO) and the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF).[14] Development of Recommendations[edit] Most of the work of ITU-T is carried out by its Sector Members and Associates, while the Telecommunication Standardization Bureau (TSB) is the executive arm of ITU-T and coordinator for a number of workshops and seminars to progress existing work areas and explore new ones. The events cover a wide array of topics in the field of information and communication technologies (ICT) and attract high-ranking experts as speakers, and attendees from engineers to high-level management from all industry sectors.[15] The technical work, the development of Recommendations, of ITU-T is managed by Study Groups (SGs). The people involved in these SGs are experts in telecommunications from all over the world. There are currently 11 SGs. Study groups meet face to face according to a calendar issued by the TSB.[16] SGs are augmented by Focus Groups (FGs), an instrument created by ITU-T, providing a way to quickly react to ICT standardization needs and allowing great flexibility in terms of participation and working methods. The key difference between SGs and FGs is that the latter have greater freedom to organize and finance themselves, and to involve non-members in their work. Focus Groups can be created very quickly, are usually short-lived and can choose their own working methods, leadership, financing, and types of deliverables.[17] Recent examples include work on Next Generation Networking, Internet Protocol Television (IPTV) and digital identity management.[18] Approval of Recommendations[edit] This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (November 2012) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) The “Alternative Approval Process” (AAP) is a fast-track approval procedure that was developed to allow standards to be brought to market in the timeframe that industry now demands. This dramatic overhaul of standards-making by streamlining approval procedures was implemented in 2001 and is estimated to have cut the time involved in this critical aspect of the standardization process by 80 to 90 per cent. This means that an average standard which took around four years to approve and publish until the mid nineties, and two years until 1997, can now be approved in an average of two months, or as little as five weeks. Besides streamlining the underlying procedures involved in the approval process, an important contributory factor to the use of AAP is electronic document handling. Once the approval process has begun the rest of the process can be completed electronically, in the vast majority of cases, with no further physical meetings. The introduction of AAP also formalizes public/private partnership in the approval process by providing equal opportunities for both Sector Members and Member States in the approval of technical standards. A panel of SG experts drafts a proposal that is then forwarded at a SG meeting to the appropriate body which decides if it is sufficiently ready to be designated a draft text and thus gives its consent for further review at the next level. After this Consent has been given, TSB announces the start of the AAP procedure by posting the draft text to the ITU-T web site and calling for comments. This gives the opportunity for all members to review the text. This phase, called Last Call, is a four-week period in which comments can be submitted by Member States and Sector Members. If no comments other than editorial corrections are received, the Recommendation is considered approved since no issues were identified that might need any further work. However, if there are any comments, the SG chairman, in consultation with TSB, sets up a comment resolution process by the concerned experts. The revised text is then posted on the web for an Additional Review period of three weeks. Similar to the Last Call phase, in Additional Review the Recommendation is considered as approved if no comments are received. If comments are received, it is apparent that there are some issues that still need more work, and the draft text and all comments are sent to the next Study Group meeting for further discussion and possible approval.[19] Those Recommendations considered as having policy or regulatory implications are approved through what is known as the “Traditional Approval Process” (TAP), which allows a longer period for reflection and commenting by Member States. TAP Recommendations are also translated into the six working languages of ITU (Arabic, Chinese, English, French, Russian and Spanish).[20] Series and Recommendations[edit] ITU-T Recommendations are the names given to telecommunications and computer protocol specification documents published by ITU-T. Many of the Recommendations that define OSI are also ISO standards. Standards for Internet protocols are typically developed in the IETF, and standards for mobile telephone systems are developed in ETSI and other forums. Series of ITU Recommendations[edit] ITU-T issues Recommendations that have names like X.500, where X is the series and 500 is an identifying number. When a Recommendation is updated, it will (mostly) keep the same number, so the year of issue may be necessary to identify a specific version of a Recommendation. The term "X.500" is used both to refer to the specific X.500 Recommendation, and to the entire family of Recommendations named X.5xx, where the specific X.500 Recommendation forms the introduction and overview to the set. The vast majority of all finalized Recommendations are available in electronic (PDF) form free of charge to all. Texts that are not free of charge include common ITU-T | ISO / IEC texts for which special arrangements exist. [21] International Telecommunication Regulations (ITRs)[edit] In addition to the ITU-T Recommendations, which have non-mandatory status until they are adopted in national laws, ITU-T is also the custodian of a binding international treaty, the International Telecommunication Regulations. The ITRs go back to the earliest days of the ITU when there were two separate treaties, dealing with telegraph and telephone. The ITRs were adopted, as a single treaty, at the World Administrative Telegraphy and Telephone Conference held in Melbourne, 1988 (WATTC-88).[22] The ITRs comprise ten articles which deal, inter alia, with the definition of international telecommunication services, cooperation between countries and national administrations, safety of life and priority of telecommunications and charging and accounting principles. The adoption of the ITRs in 1988 is often taken as the start of the wider liberalization process in international telecommunications, though a few countries, including United States and United Kingdom, had made steps to liberalize their markets before 1988.[23] The Constitution and Convention of ITU provides for the amendment of ITRs through a World Conference on International Telecommunications (WCIT). Accordingly, in 1998 there began a process of review of the ITRs;[24] and in 2009 extensive preparations began for such a conference, WCIT-12. In addition to "regional preparatory meetings,"[25] the ITU Secretariat developed 13 "Background Briefs on key issues" that were expected to be discussed at the conference.[26] Convened by former ITU secretary-general Hamadoun Touré, the Conference, WCIT-12, was then held in Dubai, United Arab Emirates, during the period 3–14 December 2014.[27][28] Key standards published by ITU[edit] ASN.1 (Abstract Syntax Notation One) Coding of audio G.711 and G.72x series Coding of still images JPEG T.80 and JPEG 2000 T.800 series Coding of video coding H.262/MPEG2-Video, H.264/MPEG-4 AVC and H.265/HEVC Construction, installation and protection of cables and other elements of outside plant, L-series Data communication over the telephone network, V-series Fax standards T.2 – T.4, T.30, T.37, T.38 G.hn (Next generation wired home networking over powerlines, phonelines and coaxial cable) [29] Green ICT standards and supplements ( L.1000 series) H.323 family of standards for multimedia and VoIP Interconnection rate harmonization, D-series International Emergency Preference Scheme E.106 IMSI codes used in SIM cards E.212 ISDN and PSTN/3G videoconferencing systems, H.320 and H.324 ISDN (Integrated Services Digital Network) Q.931 Open Systems Interconnection Optical Transport Network (OTN) G.709, G.798, G.872 Passive optical networks (PON) G.983, G.984, G.987 Public Key Infrastructure (PKI) X.509 Public telecommunication numbering plan, E.164 Security framework X.805[30] Signalling System 7 Q.7xx series Standards relating to Quality of Service (QoS) Specification and Description Language Synchronous Digital Hierarchy (SDH) G.707, G.783, G.803 Wavelength-division multiplexing (WDM) X.25 (x)DSL (Digital Subscriber Line) series of standards for broadband telecoms Hot topics[edit] ITU-T is committed to “bridging the standardization gap” – disparities in the ability of developing countries, relative to developed ones, to access, implement, contribute to and influence international ICT standards.[31] The ICT Security Standards Roadmap[32] has been developed to assist in the development of security standards by bringing together information about existing standards and current standards work in key standards development organizations. The Next Generation Networks (NGN) concept takes into consideration new realities in the telecommunication industry characterized by factors such as; the need to converge and optimize the operating networks and the extraordinary expansion of digital traffic (i.e., increasing demand for new multimedia services, mobility, etc.). ITU newslog (February 2014). First of its kind publication features ITU-T standards for smart grid and home networking.  See also[edit] Global Standards Collaboration International Telecommunication Union ITU-R recommendations ITU-T recommendations World Summit on the Information Society References[edit] ^ a b "ITU's History". International Telecommunication Union. Retrieved 2011-03-20.  ^ "TSB Director's Corner". ITU.  ^ ITU-T and TSB General Information ^ apdip.net (p13) ^ a b "CCITT - 50 YEARS OF EXCELLENCE - 1956-2006" (PDF). International Telecommunication Union. p. 8. Retrieved 2011-03-20.  ^ "CCITT - 50 YEARS OF EXCELLENCE - 1956-2006" (PDF). International Telecommunication Union. p. 14. Retrieved 2011-03-20.  ^ "CCITT - 50 YEARS OF EXCELLENCE - 1956-2006" (PDF). International Telecommunication Union. Retrieved 2011-03-20.  ^ "CCITT - 50 YEARS OF EXCELLENCE - 1956-2006" (PDF). International Telecommunication Union. p. 16. Retrieved 2011-03-20.  ^ ITU-T Standards now freely available online ^ "Free access for all to ITU-T standards.(ITU)". highbeam.com.  ^ "ITU-T Newslog - Free access for all to ITU-T standards". itu.int.  ^ "ITU-T Recommendations". ITU.  ^ "CCITT - 50 YEARS OF EXCELLENCE - 1956-2006" (PDF). International Telecommunication Union. p. 17. Retrieved 2011-03-20.  ^ apdip.net (s10) ^ apdip.net, (s13-16), General information on TSB ^ apdip.net, (s16), ITU-T Study Groups (Study Period 2009-2012) ^ itu.int, (s23-24), ITU-T Focus Groups ^ "ITU-T". itu.int.  ^ itu.int, (s28-29), ITU-T e-FLASH - Issue No. 22 ^ itu.int, (s27), ITU-T e-FLASH - Issue No. 22 ^ http://www.itu.int/en/ITU-T/publications/Pages/recs.aspx ^ itu.int ^ itu.int ^ tsbedh. "ITU-T - Review of the International Telecommunication Regulations (ITRs)". itu.int.  ^ "WCIT-12: Preparatory Process". ITU.  ^ "WCIT-12: Background Briefs and FAQs". ITU.  ^ "WCIT-12 Highlights - 13-14 December 2012". itu.int.  ^ "World Conference on International Telecommunications (WCIT-12)". ITU.  ^ Ben-Tovim, Erez (February 2014). "12". In Berger, Lars T. and Schwager, Andreas and Pagani, Pascal and Schneider, Daniel M. {ITU} {G.hn} - {B}roadband Home Networking. Devices, Circuits, and Systems. CRC Press. doi:10.1201/b16540-14. ISBN 9781466557529.  CS1 maint: Multiple names: editors list (link) ^ X.805 : Security architecture for systems providing end-to-end communications http://www.itu.int/rec/T-REC-X.805-200310-I/en ^ "ITU-T". itu.int.  ^ "ICT Security Standards Roadmap". itu.int.  External links[edit] Official website ITU-T Recommendations v t e Multimedia compression and container formats Video compression ISO/IEC MJPEG Motion JPEG 2000 MPEG-1 MPEG-2 Part 2 MPEG-4 Part 2/ASP Part 10/AVC MPEG-H Part 2/HEVC ITU-T H.120 H.261 H.262 H.263 H.264 H.265 SMPTE VC-1 VC-2 VC-3 VC-5 Others AOMedia Video Apple Video AVS Bink Cinepak Daala Dirac DV DVI FFV1 Huffyuv Indeo Microsoft Video 1 MSU Lossless Lagarith OMS Video Pixlet ProRes 422 ProRes 4444 QuickTime Animation Graphics RealVideo RTVideo SheerVideo Smacker Sorenson Video, Spark Theora Thor VP3 VP6 VP7 VP8 VP9 WMV XEB YULS Audio compression ISO/IEC MPEG-1 Layer III (MP3) MPEG-1 Layer II Multichannel MPEG-1 Layer I AAC HE-AAC AAC-LD MPEG Surround MPEG-4 ALS MPEG-4 SLS MPEG-4 DST MPEG-4 HVXC MPEG-4 CELP MPEG-D USAC MPEG-H 3D Audio ITU-T G.711 (A-law, µ-law) G.718 G.719 G.722 G.722.1 G.722.2 G.723 G.723.1 G.726 G.728 G.729 G.729.1 IETF Opus iLBC 3GPP AMR AMR-WB AMR-WB+ EVRC EVRC-B GSM-HR GSM-FR GSM-EFR Others ACELP AC-3 ALAC Asao ATRAC CELT Codec2 DRA DTS FLAC iSAC Monkey's Audio TTA True Audio MT9 Musepack OptimFROG OSQ QCELP RCELP RealAudio RTAudio SD2 SHN SILK Siren SMV Speex SVOPC TwinVQ VMR-WB Vorbis VSELP WavPack WMA MQA aptX Image compression IEC, ISO, ITU-T,W3C,IETF CCITT Group 4 JPEG JPEG 2000 JPEG XR Lossless JPEG JBIG JBIG2 PNG TIFF/EP TIFF/IT HEVC GIF TIFF Others APNG BPG DjVu EXR FLIF ICER MNG PGF QTVR WBMP WebP Containers ISO/IEC MPEG-PS MPEG-TS ISO base media file format MPEG-4 Part 14 (MP4) Motion JPEG 2000 MPEG-21 Part 9 MPEG media transport ITU-T H.222.0 T.802 Others 3GP and 3G2 AMV ASF AIFF AVI AU BPG Bink Smacker BMP DivX Media Format EVO Flash Video GXF IFF M2TS Matroska WebM MXF Ogg QuickTime File Format RatDVD RealMedia RIFF WAV MOD and TOD VOB, IFO and BUP Collaborations NETVC Alliance for Open Media MPEG-LA See Compression methods for methods and Compression software for codecs v t e Telecommunications History Beacon Broadcasting Communications satellite Computer network Drums Electrical telegraph Fax Heliographs Hydraulic telegraph Internet Mass media Mobile phone Optical telecommunication Optical telegraphy Photophone Prepaid mobile phone Radio Radiotelephone Satellite communications Smoke signals Telecommunications history Telegraphy Telephone The Telephone Cases Television Timeline of communication technology Undersea telegraph line Videoconferencing Videophone Videotelephony Pioneers Edwin Howard Armstrong John Logie Baird Paul Baran Alexander Graham Bell Tim Berners-Lee Jagadish Chandra Bose Vint Cerf Claude Chappe Donald Davies Lee de Forest Philo Farnsworth Reginald Fessenden Elisha Gray Innocenzo Manzetti Guglielmo Marconi Antonio Meucci Alexander Stepanovich Popov Johann Philipp Reis Nikola Tesla Camille Papin Tissot Alfred Vail Charles Wheatstone Vladimir K. Zworykin Transmission media Electromagnetic radiation Electrical cable Free-space optical communication Molecular communication Optical fiber Network topology and switching Links Nodes Terminal node Network switching (circuit packet) Telephone exchange Multiplexing Space-division Frequency-division Time-division Polarization-division Orbital angular-momentum Code-division Networks ARPANET BITNET Cellular network Computer CYCLADES Ethernet FidoNet Internet ISDN LAN Mobile NGN NPL network Public Switched Telephone Radio Telecommunications equipment Television Telex WAN Wireless World Wide Web Category Portal Authority control WorldCat Identities VIAF: 145717867 LCCN: no95045759 ISNI: 0000 0000 9833 608X GND: 5177319-3 BNF: cb14536478p (data) Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=ITU-T&oldid=717158374" Categories: International Telecommunication Union Standards organizations Telecommunications organizations Internet governance organizations Hidden categories: CS1 maint: Multiple names: editors list Articles containing French-language text Articles needing additional references from November 2012 All articles needing additional references Wikipedia articles with VIAF identifiers Wikipedia articles with LCCN identifiers Wikipedia articles with ISNI identifiers Wikipedia articles with GND identifiers Wikipedia articles with BNF identifiers Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Article Talk Variants Views Read Edit View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Featured content Current events Random article Donate to Wikipedia Wikipedia store Interaction Help About Wikipedia Community portal Recent changes Contact page Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Cite this page Print/export Create a book Download as PDF Printable version Languages Català Dansk Deutsch Español Esperanto 한국어 Italiano עברית Magyar Nederlands 日本語 Polski Português Русский Türkçe Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links This page was last modified on 26 April 2016, at 02:16. Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view