Flag of Bahrain - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Flag of Bahrain From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to: navigation, search Flag Ratio: 3:5 The national flag of Bahrain (Arabic: علم البحرين‎) consists of a white band on the left, separated from a red area on the right by five triangles that serve as a serrated line. The five triangles symbolises the 5 pillars of islam It is sometimes mistaken for the flag of Qatar, but that flag is maroon, not red, has more points (9), and normally has a much greater length-to-width ratio. Contents 1 Design 1.1 Color 2 Use 2.1 Other flags 3 History 4 References Design[edit] The white color comprises 13/40 (32.5%) of the flag area, while the red color comprises 27/40 (67.5%) of the area. Measurements of the construction of the flag Color[edit] The color specification is red: Pantone 186 c / CMYK (%) C 0 – M 90 – Y 80 – K 5[1] Use[edit] The flag is used on land and at sea as a national, civil and war ensign. In 2002, the King of Bahrain Hamad bin Isa Al Khalifa, issued Decree by Law No.(4) for 2002, which pertained to the flag: Article 1: The Flag of the Kingdom of Bahrain shall take a rectangular shape, and shall be divided into two main sections; the first in red, and the other in white color. Article II: The King shall have his own flag, for which a royal order shall be issued to determine its shape, measures, and places. Article III: The Flag of the Kingdom of Bahrain shall be hoisted on the Royal Court, Palaces, governmental buildings, public establishments, embassies, Bahraini bureaus abroad, and Bahraini ships. Article IV: Each non-Bahraini ship entering the territorial waters of the Kingdom of Bahrain shall hoist the Flag of the Kingdom, and shall keep the flag hoisted till it departs from the territorial waters of the Kingdom. Article V: The Flag shall be hoisted on governmental buildings, public institutions during public holidays and occasions from sun-rise to sun-set. Article VI: The Flag of the Kingdom of Bahrain shall not be hoisted on vehicles, except on the official protocol vehicles. Article VII: The Flag of the Kingdom of Bahrain shall be hoisted half mast at the state of mourning. Article VIII: The Flag of the Kingdom of Bahrain shall not be used for commercial purposes. Article IX: In case the Flag is used otherwise, and not as stipulated in the above law, a punishment of one month of imprisonment as a maximum, or a fine not exceeding than BD 100, or both shall be inflicted.[1] Other flags[edit] Royal Standard Flag of the Bahrain Defence Force Flag of the Bahrain Navy Flag of the Bahrain Air Force Flag of the Bahrain Army History[edit] The earliest known flags of Bahrain were plain red. In 1820, Bahrain signed a general maritime treaty with the British Empire, and as result, a white stripe was added to the flag to signify the treaty and to distinguish it from the flags commonly used by pirates.[2] In 1932, a serrated edge was added to the flag in order to differentiate it from those of its neighbours.[3] The flag originally had twenty-eight white points, but this was reduced to eight in 1972.[3] On 14 February 2002, the number was again reduced to five, so that each of the points could stand for one of the Five Pillars of Islam.[4] Flag used prior to 1820. Flag used from 1820 to 1932. Flag used from 1932 to 1972. Flag used from 1972 to 2002. References[edit] ^ a b "National Flag of Bahrain". BBC News. Retrieved 16 June 2012.  |first1= missing |last1= in Authors list (help) ^ Complete Flags of the World (Dk). DK Publishing. 2014. p. 186. ISBN 978-1409353713.  ^ a b Historical flags of Bahrain at Flags of the World ^ Bahrain at Flags of the World v t e Flags of Asia Sovereign states Afghanistan Armenia Azerbaijan Bahrain Bangladesh Bhutan Brunei Cambodia China Cyprus East Timor (Timor-Leste) Egypt Georgia India Indonesia Iran Iraq Israel Japan Jordan Kazakhstan North Korea South Korea Kuwait Kyrgyzstan Laos Lebanon Malaysia Maldives Mongolia Myanmar Nepal Oman Pakistan Philippines Qatar Russia Saudi Arabia Singapore Sri Lanka Syria Tajikistan Thailand Turkey Turkmenistan United Arab Emirates Uzbekistan Vietnam Yemen States with limited recognition Abkhazia Nagorno-Karabakh Northern Cyprus Palestine South Ossetia Taiwan Dependencies and other territories British Indian Ocean Territory Christmas Island Cocos (Keeling) Islands Hong Kong Macau v t e National flags and coats of arms National flags Sovereign states Dependent territories Timeline National coats of arms Sovereign states Dependent territories Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Flag_of_Bahrain&oldid=712680010" Categories: 2002 introductions National symbols of Bahrain National flags Red and white flags Hidden categories: CS1 errors: missing author or editor Articles containing Arabic-language text Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Article Talk Variants Views Read Edit View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Featured content Current events Random article Donate to Wikipedia Wikipedia store Interaction Help About Wikipedia Community portal Recent changes Contact page Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Cite this page Print/export Create a book Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Languages Afrikaans አማርኛ العربية Azərbaycanca বাংলা Беларуская Български Bosanski Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego ગુજરાતી 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski বিষ্ণুপ্রিয়া মণিপুরী Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Basa Jawa Lietuvių Magyar Македонски मराठी Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Polski Português Русский Scots Sicilianu Simple English Slovenčina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Basa Sunda Suomi Svenska ไทย Türkçe Українська Vepsän kel’ Tiếng Việt Yorùbá 中文 Edit links This page was last modified on 30 March 2016, at 14:28. Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view