Prefectures in France - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Prefectures in France From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to: navigation, search This article does not cite any sources. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (January 2016) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) A prefecture (French: préfecture) in France may refer to: the Chef-lieu de département, the town in which the administration of a department is located; the Chef-lieu de région, the town in which the administration of a region is located; the jurisdiction of a prefecture; the official residence or headquarters of a prefect. Contents 1 Role of the prefecture in departments 2 Paris 3 Divisions of the departments 4 See also Role of the prefecture in departments[edit] There are 101 prefectures in France, one for each department. The official in charge is the prefect (French: préfet). The prefecture is an administration that belongs to the Ministry of the Interior, and is therefore in charge of the delivery of identity cards, driving licenses, passports, residency and work permits for foreigners, vehicle registration, registration of associations (creation, status modification, dissolution), and of the management of the police and firefighters. The prefect represents the national government at the local level and as such exercises the powers that are constitutionally attributed to the national government. The prefect issues ordinances written for the application of local law, e.g. to close a building that does not conform to safety codes, or modify vehicular traffic regulations (speed limit, construction permits). The governing body of the department is the departmental council (French: Conseil départemental), which is in charge of the building and maintenance of schools and roads, financial assistance to dependent people (disabled and elderly), and promotion of local economic development, etc. In the past, the prefect was head of the department, however, since 1982, the president of the departmental council has assumed the role of chief executive of the department. Paris[edit] Petite Couronne There is an exception in Paris (Île-de-France) and its three surrounding departments (Petite Couronne). These departments are administered by a single prefecture for law enforcement and security purposes, called the Prefecture of Police (French: préfet de police); a situation inherited from the Paris Commune of 1871. The power of law enforcement is usually invested in the mayor in other French communes. Divisions of the departments[edit] The departments are divided into arrondissements, themselves divided into cantons. The chef-lieu d'arrondissement is the subprefecture (French: sous-préfecture). The official in charge is the subprefect (French: sous-préfet. Cantons have relatively few competences, the most important of which being the local organisation of elections (cantons are electoral subdivisions). See also[edit] Administrative divisions of France French National Police v t e Prefectures of the regions of France Metropolitan France Strasbourg (Alsace-Champagne-Ardenne-Lorraine) Bordeaux (Aquitaine-Limousin-Poitou-Charentes) Lyon (Auvergne-Rhône-Alpes) Dijon (Bourgogne-Franche-Comté) Rennes (Brittany) Orléans (Centre-Val de Loire) Ajaccio (Corsica) Paris (Île-de-France) Toulouse (Languedoc-Roussillon-Midi-Pyrénées) Lille (Nord-Pas-de-Calais-Picardy) Rouen (Normandy) Nantes (Pays de la Loire) Marseille (Provence-Alpes-Côte d'Azur) Overseas regions Cayenne (French Guiana) Basse-Terre (Guadeloupe) Fort-de-France (Martinique) Mamoudzou (Mayotte) Saint-Denis (Réunion) v t e French terms for country subdivisions arrondissement département préfecture subprefectures Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Prefectures_in_France&oldid=701094406" Categories: Government of France Prefectures in France Hidden categories: Articles lacking sources from January 2016 All articles lacking sources Articles containing French-language text Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Article Talk Variants Views Read Edit View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Featured content Current events Random article Donate to Wikipedia Wikipedia store Interaction Help About Wikipedia Community portal Recent changes Contact page Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Cite this page Print/export Create a book Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Languages Afrikaans Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца)‎ Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Español Esperanto Euskara Français Galego Bahasa Indonesia ქართული Latina Македонски Norsk nynorsk Occitan Português Русский Scots Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Svenska Tiếng Việt Edit links This page was last modified on 22 January 2016, at 13:31. Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view