Software developer - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Software developer From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to: navigation, search A software developer is a person concerned with facets of the software development process, including the research, design, programming, and testing of computer software. Some notable software developers include Peter Norton (developer of Norton Utilities), Richard Garriott (Ultima-series creator), and Philippe Kahn (Borland key founder), all of whom started as entrepreneurial individuals or small-team software developers. Other names which are often used in the same close context are programmer, software analyst, and software engineer. According to developer Eric Sink, the differences between system design, software development and programming are more apparent. Already in the current market place there can be found a segregation between programmers and developers,[dubious – discuss] being that one who implements is not the same as the one who designs the class structure or hierarchy. Even more so that developers become systems architects, those who design the multi-leveled architecture or component interactions of a large software system.[1] (see also Debate over who is a software engineer) In a large company, there may be employees whose sole responsibility may consist of only one of the phases above. In smaller development environments, a few, or even a single individual might handle the complete process. Contents 1 History 2 See also 3 References 4 External links History[edit] The word "software" was coined as a prank as early as 1953, but did not appear in print until the 1960s.[2] Before this time, computers were programmed either by customers, or the few commercial computer vendors of the time, such as UNIVAC and IBM. The first company founded to provide software products and services was Computer Usage Company in 1955.[3] The software industry expanded in the early 1960s, almost immediately after computers were first sold in mass-produced quantities. Universities, government, and business customers created a demand for software. Many of these programs were written in-house by full-time staff programmers. Some were distributed freely between users of a particular machine for no charge. Others were done on a commercial basis, and other firms such as Computer Sciences Corporation (founded in 1959) started to grow. The computer/hardware makers started bundling operating systems, systems software and programming environments with their machines.[citation needed] When Digital Equipment Corporation (DEC) brought a relatively low-priced microcomputer to market, it brought computing within the reach of many more companies and universities worldwide, and it spawned great innovation in terms of new, powerful programming languages and methodologies. New software was built for microcomputers, so other manufacturers including IBM, followed DEC's example quickly, resulting in the IBM AS/400 amongst others.[citation needed] The industry expanded greatly with the rise of the personal computer ("PC") in the mid-1970s, which brought computing to the desktop of the office worker. In the following years, it also created a growing market for games, applications, and utilities. DOS, Microsoft's first operating system product, was the dominant operating system at the time.[4] In the early years of the 21st century, another successful business model has arisen for hosted software, called software-as-a-service, or SaaS; this was at least the third time[citation needed] this model had been attempted. From the point of view of producers of some proprietary software, SaaS reduces the concerns about unauthorized copying, since it can only be accessed through the Web, and by definition no client software is loaded onto the end user's PC.[citation needed] By 2014 the role of cloud developer had been defined; in this context, one definition of a "developer" in general was published:[5] Developers make software for the world to use. The job of a developer is to crank out code -- fresh code for new products, code fixes for maintenance, code for business logic, and code for supporting libraries. See also[edit] Bus factor References[edit] ^ Eric Sink. "Small ISVs: You need Developers, not Programmers". sourcegear. Retrieved 2008-06-06. A programmer is someone who does nothing but code new features and (if you're lucky) fix bugs. They don't write specs. They don't write automated test cases. They don't help keep the automated build system up to date. They don't help customers work out tough problems. They don't help write documentation. They don't help with testing. They don't even read code. All they do is write new code.  External link in |publisher= (help) ^ Paul Niquette (1995). "Softword: Provenance for the Word 'Software'".  adapted from Sophisticated: The Magazine ISBN 1-58922-233-4 ^ Elmer C. Kubie (Summer 1994). "Recollections of the first software company". Annals of the History of Computing (IEEE Computer Society) 16 (2): 65–71. doi:10.1109/85.279238.  ^ Rebello, Kathy; Schwartz, Evan I.; Verity, John W.; Lewyn, Mark; Levine, Jonathan (28 February 1993). "Is Microsoft Too Powerful?". Businessweek Archives. Bloomberg Businessweek. Retrieved 26 September 2014.  ^ Hardiman, Nick (24 July 2014). "A portrait of the modern cloud developer". TechRepublic.  External links[edit] Software Developer description from the US Department of Labor NetBrains software designers Authority control GND: 7701096-6 Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Software_developer&oldid=717972309" Categories: Computer programmers People in information technology Computer occupations Hidden categories: CS1 errors: external links Use dmy dates from July 2015 All accuracy disputes Articles with disputed statements from March 2011 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from May 2014 Articles with unsourced statements from July 2012 Wikipedia articles with GND identifiers Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Article Talk Variants Views Read Edit View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Featured content Current events Random article Donate to Wikipedia Wikipedia store Interaction Help About Wikipedia Community portal Recent changes Contact page Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Cite this page Print/export Create a book Download as PDF Printable version Languages Afrikaans العربية বাংলা Български Català Čeština Deutsch Eesti Español Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia Italiano ქართული Кыргызча Magyar മലയാളം مصرى Bahasa Melayu မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands 日本語 Scots Simple English Suomi Svenska தமிழ் ไทย Türkçe اردو Vèneto Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links This page was last modified on 30 April 2016, at 20:12. Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view