Finance (game) - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Finance (game) From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to: navigation, search The Fascinating Game of Finance Finance Finance and Fortune The Great Game (1935 FGC) House and Lot (1936 PB) Parker Brothers Business Trading Game (1958) Parker Brothers Junior Business Trading Game (1962) Manufacturer(s) L. S. Ayres & Co. Electronic Laboratories, Inc. Designer(s) Elizabeth Magie Louis & Fred Thun Dan Layman Publisher(s) Dan Layman Knapp Electric Finance Game Company/ Parker Brothers Publication date 1932 Years active 1932-1970s Players 2–8 Setup time 5–15 minutes Playing time Approximately 1.5–3 hours Random chance High (dice rolling, card drawing) Skill(s) required Negotiation, Resource management Finance, or The Fascinating Game of Finance or Finance and Fortune, is a board game originally released in 1932. The game is based on The Landlord's Game in the movement of pieces around the board, the use of cards, properties that can be purchased, and houses that can be erected on them. The game also has railroads, however these may not be purchased. The game is actually a predecessor to Monopoly. Contents 1 Overview of game 2 History 2.1 Finance 2.2 Fortune 2.3 Finance and Fortune 3 Known changes 4 References 5 External links Overview of game[edit] The game begins with each player on "Cash Here" and $1925. Properties clockwise around the board begin with low value to high value purchase prices, with costs for additional houses and rents also increasing. Players move again on doubles (with no limit on numbers of doubles that may be thrown), and if a player lands on another player, the original player moves back five spaces and pays rent, follows directions, etc. Players may trade properties or sell them back to the bank, but may not mortgage property. If a player is unable to pay, all their property is returned to the bank, and the player is out. The game continues until only one player is left (an alternate rule establishes a time limit and players total up their wealth). History[edit] Finance[edit] Finance was created by Dan Layman who played, with Louis Thun, Louis and Fred's version of the auction-monopoly games that had been spawned from The Landlord's Game at Williams College in Reading, PA. With the Thuns wanting to patented their game found the Landlord's Game patent and only copyrighted their rule additions (additional railroads own double rent, Community Chest, paying $50 to get out of jail). With the "Monopoly" name and game then in the public domain, Layman decided to call the game, "Finance".[1] With L. S. Ayres & Co.[2] then Electronics Laboratories, Lyman published the game for a year before selling it to Knapp Electric for $200.[1] Initially, the game was sold in small black boxes (some of which came with poker chips for money) with four different versions of the rules. Otherwise, it is almost identical to Monopoly including Chance and Community Chest cards.[2] It is said that Layman taught Ruth Hoskins, who moved to Atlantic City and played it there using local Atlantic City streets. One theory on the street names chosen is that these were the streets players lived on with a couple of later changes of South Carolina to North Carolina and Arctic to Mediterranean.[2] Pete Daggett Jr., a friend of Dan Layman, actually taught Ruth Hoskins. Hoskins then moved to Atlantic City to teach school in 1932 and created the Atlantic City version in the late 1930s with her friends. Eugene and Ruth Raiford, friends of Hoskins, showed the game to Charles E. Todd, a hotel manager in Germantown, Pennsylvania. Todd introduced Charles and Esther Darrow to the game. The Darrows were occasional hotel guests; Esther was Todd's former neighbor.[1] With Parker Brothers taking over for Darrow in publishing his Monopoly game in 1935, Parker Brothers purchased "Finance" from Knapp for $10,000. Parker Brothers changed Finance so it was less similar to Monopoly and published it under the Finance Game Company name for 1935. Parker Brothers made additional changes in 1936 and published it with the Parker Brothers name.[1][2] Fortune[edit] During 1935, Parker Brothers was developing its own version of monopoly, Fortune, in case its deal with Darrow and the patent fell through. Almost an exact copy of Monopoly, Fortune had only 10,000 copies made due to the deal with Darrow working out and only being published to keep the trademark to the name. Also in 1935, Finance outsells Monopoly.[3] Finance and Fortune[edit] With Parker Brothers wishing to hold on to the trademark on "Fortune", the second version of "Finance" by Parker Brothers was named Finance and Fortune. With its 1958 edition, the game's name reverted to Finance as they developed a new marble game having the "Fortune" name. The last known version was printed in 1962.[2] Known changes[edit] Known changes between the original and the Parker Brother editions: removed Community Chest dropped colored property groups[2] Rent chart card[4] replaced the Property Cards[2] colored standard pawns[2] changed to colored different shaped pawns[5] properties renamed[6] property purchase prices increased[6] References[edit] ^ a b c d Bellis, Mary. "Monopoly, Monopoly: Part 1: The History of the Monopoly Board Game and Charles Darrow". Inventors. About.com. Retrieved 22 February 2012.  ^ a b c d e f g h "Finance". Monopoly History. World of Monopoly. Retrieved 21 February 2012.  ^ Anspach, Ralph. "Game Evolution". The Board Games. antimonopoly.com. Archived from the original on July 20, 2011. Retrieved 21 February 2012.  ^ Smidt, David. "Rent chart". Finance and Fortune board game record. boardgamegeek.com. Retrieved 21 February 2012.  ^ Smidt, David. "Box contents". Finance and Fortune. boardgamegeek.com. Retrieved 21 February 2012.  ^ a b Finance at BoardGameGeek Orbanes, Philip (2006). Monopoly: The World's Most Famous Game-- and how it Got that Way. Da Capo Press. pp. 9–10. ISBN 0306814897. Retrieved July 5, 2015.  External links[edit] Finance at BoardGameGeek Fortune at BoardGameGeek v t e Monopoly History History of Monopoly Chance and Community Chest cards Game designers & early publishers Elizabeth "Lizzie" Magie Scott Nearing Charles Darrow Rexford Tugwell Related games Anti-Monopoly The Landlord's Game Easy Money Finance Hasbro Monopoly and licensees Monopoly Parker Brothers Milton Bradley Hasbro Waddingtons Winning Moves Get Out of Jail Free card Rich Uncle Pennybags Monopoly money Modern variants Licensed and localized editions My Monopoly Monopoly: The Mega Edition Monopoly City Spin-off games Board/dice games Monopoly Junior Advance to Boardwalk Don't Go to Jail (Monopoly Express) Card games Free Parking Waterworks Monopoly: The Card Game Express Monopoly Monopoly Deal Monopoly on television 1990 game show Monopoly Millionaires' Club Monopoly metaphors and idioms "Do not pass Go. Do not collect $200." "Get Out of Jail Free card" "Monopoly money" See also Anti-Monopoly Ralph Anspach McDonald's Monopoly Pinball game Monopoly Tycoon Monopoly Party Video games Monopoly City Streets The Mad Magazine Game Monopoly Millionaires' Club Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Finance_(game)&oldid=708292786" Categories: Board games introduced in 1932 Economic simulation board games Parker Brothers games Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Article Talk Variants Views Read Edit View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Featured content Current events Random article Donate to Wikipedia Wikipedia store Interaction Help About Wikipedia Community portal Recent changes Contact page Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Cite this page Print/export Create a book Download as PDF Printable version Languages Add links This page was last modified on 4 March 2016, at 19:23. Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view