Les Misérables (2012 film) - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Les Misérables (2012 film) From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to: navigation, search Les Misérables Theatrical release poster Directed by Tom Hooper Produced by Tim Bevan Eric Fellner Debra Hayward Cameron Mackintosh Screenplay by William Nicholson Alain Boublil Claude-Michel Schönberg Herbert Kretzmer Based on Les Misérables  by Claude-Michel Schönberg Alain Boublil Les Misérables  by Victor Hugo Starring Hugh Jackman Russell Crowe Anne Hathaway Amanda Seyfried Eddie Redmayne Helena Bonham Carter Sacha Baron Cohen Music by Claude-Michel Schönberg Cinematography Danny Cohen Edited by Melanie Ann Oliver Chris Dickens Production company Relativity Media StudioCanal Working Title Films Cameron Mackintosh Ltd.[1] Distributed by Universal Pictures Release dates 5 December 2012 (2012-12-05) (London premiere)[2] 25 December 2012 (2012-12-25) (United States) 11 January 2013 (2013-01-11) (United Kingdom) Running time 158 minutes[3] Country United Kingdom[4][5] United States[6] Language English Budget $61 million[7][8] Box office $441.8 million[8] Les Misérables is a 2012 British-American epic romantic musical period drama film produced by Working Title Films and distributed by Universal Pictures. The film is based on the musical of the same name by Alain Boublil and Claude-Michel Schönberg which is in turn based on the 1862 French novel by Victor Hugo. The film is directed by Tom Hooper, scripted by William Nicholson, Boublil, Schönberg, and Herbert Kretzmer, and stars an ensemble cast led by Hugh Jackman, Russell Crowe, Anne Hathaway, and Amanda Seyfried. The film tells the story of Jean Valjean, an ex-convict who, inspired by a kindly bishop, decides to turn his life around. He eventually becomes mayor of a town in France and owner of a factory in that town. He is always alert to the risk of being captured again by police inspector Javert, who is ruthless in hunting down law-breakers, believing they cannot change for the better. One of Valjean's factory workers, Fantine, blames him for her being cast into a life of prostitution. When she dies, he feels responsible and agrees to take care of her illegitimate daughter Cosette — though he must first escape Javert. Later, when Cosette is grown, they are swept up in the political turmoil in Paris, which culminates in the Paris Uprising of 1832. Attempts to adapt a Les Misérables film from the stage musical had taken place since the late 1980s. In June 2011, from a screenplay by Nicholson, production of the film officially began with Hooper and Mackintosh serving as director and producer, and the main characters were cast later that year. Principal photography commenced in March 2012,[9] and took place in various English locations, including Greenwich, London, Chatham, Winchester, Bath and Portsmouth; as well as in Gourdon, France. Les Misérables premiered in London 5 December 2012, and was released 25 December 2012 in the United States and 11 January 2013 in the United Kingdom.[2][8][10] The film received generally favourable[11] reviews, with many critics praising the cast, and Jackman, Hathaway, Eddie Redmayne and Samantha Barks being the most often singled out for praise. The film won the Golden Globe Award for Best Motion Picture – Musical or Comedy, the Golden Globe Award for Best Actor – Motion Picture Musical or Comedy for Jackman and the Golden Globe Award for Best Supporting Actress – Motion Picture for Hathaway. It also won four British Academy Film Awards (BAFTA), including the Best Actress in a Supporting Role (Hathaway). It received eight Academy Award nominations including Best Picture (the first musical nominated since 2002's winner Chicago) and Best Actor for Jackman, and won three, for Best Sound Mixing, Best Makeup and Hairstyling and Best Supporting Actress for Hathaway.[12] Contents 1 Plot 2 Cast 3 Musical numbers 4 Production 4.1 Development 4.2 Pre-production 4.3 Filming 4.4 Post-production 5 Distribution 5.1 Marketing 5.2 Release 5.3 Home media 6 Reception 6.1 Box office 6.2 Critical response 6.3 Accolades 7 References 8 External links Plot[edit] In 1815, convict Jean Valjean is released on parole by prison guard Javert after serving a nineteen-year sentence for stealing a loaf of bread and numerous escape attempts. His paroled status ensures he gets no employment or accommodation, but he is offered food and shelter by the Bishop of Digne. Valjean repays the bishop by stealing his silver during the night. When he is captured by the constables, the Bishop tells them that the silver was given as a gift, securing Valjean's release. The Bishop tells Valjean to take the silver and do something worthwhile with his life. Moved by the Bishop's grace, Valjean breaks his parole and vows to start a new life under a new identity. Eight years later, Valjean has become a factory owner and mayor of Montreuil, Pas-de-Calais, while Javert has been assigned as his new chief of police. In their initial meeting, Javert suspects Valjean's identity after witnessing his strength as he lifts a heavy cart to free a trapped man. Meanwhile, Fantine, one of Valjean's workers, is discovered by the other women working there to send money to her illegitimate daughter Cosette, who lives with the unscrupulous Thénardiers and their daughter Éponine. Outraged that Fantine has spurned his advances, the foreman dismisses her for promiscuity. In a desperate attempt to support her daughter, Fantine sells her hair and teeth and eventually becomes a prostitute. She is arrested by Javert after attacking an abusive customer, but is saved by Valjean, who has her hospitalised and watches over her. Later, Javert tells Valjean that he attempted to file a report against him only to be told that another man had already been apprehended. Because of this, Javert tries to resign his duties, but Valjean refuses, saying that he only did his job. Finally unable to accept that an innocent man could be condemned in his place, Valjean reveals his identity to the court. He returns to the hospital, where he vows to Fantine before she dies that he will watch over her daughter. Javert arrives to take Valjean into custody, but Valjean pleads for enough time to rescue Cosette, which Javert refuses. After a brief fight and Javert revealing that he was born inside a jail, Valjean jumps into a river to escape. Cosette lives with the Thenardiers dreaming of having a mother. The Thenadiers own an inn where they scam the guests and steal their belongings. He finds Cosette in the woods since the Thenardiers ordered her to draw some water from the well. Valjean pays Fantine's debts, and leaves with Cosette, promising to be like a father to her. Valjean and Cosette flee to Paris. The Thénardiers wonder whether they demanded enough money from Valjean, and how much more money he might have. After Valjean and Cosette escape to a convent, Javert vows to bring the escaped convict to justice. Nine years later, there is increasing poverty in Paris. Jean Maximilien Lamarque, the only government official sympathetic towards the poor, is nearing death; therefore a large group of young revolutionary students, known as the Friends of the ABC, plan a rebellion against the French monarchy. The students consist of Marius Pontmercy, Enjolras, Gavroche, Grantaire, Courfeyrac, Combeferre, Joly, and Jean Prouvaire. Marius lives in a small room near the Thénardiers and has become friendly with their daughter, Éponine, who has fallen deeply in love with him but whom he considers to be merely his friend. When Valjean and Cosette are giving alms to the poor, Marius catches a glimpse of Cosette and instantly falls in love. The Thénardiers also see Valjean and believe they now have their chance to extract more money. Valjean and Thénardier argue and Javert arrives to intervene. Valjean and Cosette slip away before Javert can recognise them and Thénardier devises a plot to rob Valjean. Marius pleads with Éponine to find out where Cosette lives so he can see her again. At the ABC cafe, Enjolras rallies the students when Gavroche brings word that Lamarque has died. Éponine leads Marius to Cosette. Marius and Cosette profess their love, while Éponine laments that her secret love for Marius will go unrequited. As Marius and Cosette conclude their talk, Thénardier's gang arrives to capture Valjean and earn a reward from Javert. Éponine screams to warn Valjean and Cosette, and Valjean decides to flee, unaware of Cosette's desire for Marius. Cosette tries to dissuade him, then asks about their pasts. Valjean declines and she leaves a note for Marius explaining her departure. Éponine finds Cosette's letter to Marius, who becomes dismayed. He sends a farewell to Cosette and decides to join the revolution. Éponine joins too, disguised as a man, just to be near Marius. Enjolras urges the Parisians to full revolt. The next day, the students interrupt Lamarque's funeral procession to begin their revolt and build barricades throughout Paris. Javert poses as a rebel to spy on them, but is quickly exposed by street child Gavroche and captured. During the ensuing battle, Éponine intervenes in standoff between Marius and a soldier at the cost of her own life. She gives Marius the letter Cosette wrote and professes her love to him before she dies in his arms, leaving Marius devastated and heartbroken at the loss of his best friend as well as the revelation of her feelings. Meanwhile, Marius asks Gavroche to deliver a letter to Cosette. When Gavroche arrives at Valjean's house, Valjean takes the letter and learns of their love. He abandons his plans to flee the country and instead goes to the barricade to protect Marius. After saving Enjolras from a sniper, he is given custody of the prisoner, Javert, whom he says he will execute. However, when the two are alone, Valjean frees Javert who leaves, confused by this act of mercy from a criminal whom he holds in low regard. The students settle down for the night and reminisce. Enjolras tells the other students to stay awake in case the enemy strikes unexpectedly in the night, but he tells Marius to get some sleep, knowing Marius is still much too devastated over losing Éponine to stay awake. Elephant of the Bastille on the Les Misérables film set When the Parisians do not join the revolution as they expected, the students resolve to fight to the death. Everyone is killed except Marius, who is saved when Valjean drags his unconscious body into the sewers before the army arrives. Thénardier discovers Marius and Valjean and steals Marius's ring before moving on to scavenge other bodies. Valjean attacks Thénardier and demands to know the way out. Thénardier shows the way, and Valjean escapes the sewers carrying Marius, but encounters Javert. When Valjean asks Javert to take Marius to a doctor, he refuses and threatens to kill him if he does not surrender. Valjean ignores him and leaves with Marius. Stunned by Valjean's earlier mercy toward him and his own recent mercy towards Valjean, and unable to reconcile the conflict between his civil and moral duties, two things which he always considered the same, Javert drops his pistol into the sewers and jumps to his death in the Seine. After recovering at his grandfather's home, Marius mourns his friends, and Cosette comforts him. Valjean sees that Cosette and Marius are happy together and believes that his presence can only threaten their happiness. He reveals his past to Marius and tells him he must leave to ensure their safety and happiness. Marius is shocked, and at first attempts to persuade him to stay, but reluctantly accepts Valjean's decision to leave, promising not to tell Cosette that her father is a fugitive. Marius and Cosette marry, although Cosette is sad that Valjean is not with them. The Thénardiers attempt to crash the reception and tell Marius that they saw his father-in-law (Valjean) carrying a murdered corpse through the sewers. They plan to blackmail him to keep it quiet. As proof, Thénardier shows Marius the ring that he stole from the murder victim in the sewers. Recognizing the ring as his own, Marius realises it was Valjean who saved his life. The Thénardiers are ejected from the wedding, and Marius and Cosette hurry to find Valjean, who is dying in a local convent. As he perceives Fantine's spirit arriving to take him to heaven, Cosette and Marius rush in to bid him farewell. Valjean hands Cosette a letter of his confession of his past life and joins the spirits of the Bishop, Fantine, Enjolras, Grantaire, Éponine, Gavroche, Courfeyrac, Joly and the other rebels at the holy barricade. Cast[edit] Actor Role Jackman, HughHugh Jackman     Valjean, JeanJean Valjean Crowe, RussellRussell Crowe Javert, Javert Hathaway, AnneAnne Hathaway Fantine, Fantine Seyfried, AmandaAmanda Seyfried Cosette, Cosette Redmayne, EddieEddie Redmayne Pontmercy, MariusMarius Pontmercy Tveit, AaronAaron Tveit Enjolras, Enjolras Barks, SamanthaSamantha Barks Éponine, Éponine Isabelle Allen, Isabelle Allen Young Cosette Daniel Huttlestone, Daniel Huttlestone Gavroche, Gavroche Wilkinson, ColmColm Wilkinson Bishop Myriel, Bishop Myriel Bonham Carter, HelenaHelena Bonham Carter Madame Thénardier, Madame Thénardier Baron Cohen, SachaSacha Baron Cohen Thénardier, Thénardier Carvel, BertieBertie Carvel Bamatabois Blagden, GeorgeGeorge Blagden Grantaire, Grantaire Donnelly, KillianKillian Donnelly Combeferre, Combeferre Fee, FraFra Fee Courfeyrac, Courfeyrac Brammer, AlistairAlistair Brammer Prouvaire, JeanJean Prouvaire Vick, GabrielGabriel Vick Feuilly, Feuilly Skinner, HughHugh Skinner Joly, Joly Lewis, IwanIwan Lewis Bahorel, Bahorel Neal, StuartStuart Neal Laigle, Laigle Fraser, HadleyHadley Fraser National Guard Leader, National Guard Leader Chasen, HeatherHeather Chasen Madame Magloire, Madame Magloire Glen, GeorgieGeorgie Glen Mademoiselle Baptistine, Mademoiselle Baptistine Hugh Jackman stars as Jean Valjean, a Frenchman released from Toulon prison after 19 years of imprisonment for stealing bread and failed attempts at escaping from the prison.[13] Around June 2011, Jackman met with producer Cameron Mackintosh to audition in New York.[14] To prepare for the role, Jackman lost 15 pounds and later regained 30 pounds to mirror his character's success.[14] He avoided drinking coffee, warmed up at least 15 minutes every day, kept Ricola lozenges, drank as much as seven litres of water per day, sat in steam three times a day, took cold baths and used a wet washcloth over his face while flying, citing the musical's original co-director Trevor Nunn for his training.[15] He worked extensively with vocal coach Joan Lader, and managed to extend his vocal range, which he originally categorised a high baritone, up to tenor.[16] Russell Crowe stars as Javert, a police inspector dedicating his life to imprisoning Valjean once again.[13] Before being cast as Javert, Crowe was initially dissatisfied with the character. On his way to Europe for a friend's wedding, Crowe came to London and met with producer Cameron Mackintosh. On meeting with Tom Hooper, he told the director about his concerns about playing Javert, and after meeting with him, Crowe was "determined to be involved in the project and play Javert. I think it had something to do with Tom's passion for what he was about to undertake, and he clearly understood the problems and he clearly understood the challenge."[17] On visiting Victor Hugo's home in Paris, Crowe said, "[The house's curator] told me about [19th century detective Eugene Francois] Vidocq, a man who had been both a prisoner and a policeman, the man credited with inventing undercover police work when he established the Brigade de Surete."[14] Anne Hathaway plays Fantine, and Amanda Seyfried plays Cosette.[18][19][20] Fantine is a struggling factory worker and mother of an illegitimate child, Cosette, who is kept by the Thénardiers until Valjean buys her from them. When Hathaway was cast, she stated, "There was resistance because I was between their ideal ages for the parts—maybe not mature enough for Fantine but past the point where I could believably play Cosette."[14] On developing Cosette, Seyfried said, "In the little time that I had to explain Cosette and give the audience a reason [to see her] a symbol of love and strength and light in this tragedy, I needed to be able to convey things you may not have connected with in the show."[21] A vocal coach was enlisted to help her with the songs.[22] Isabelle Allen plays young Cosette, a child.[23] On working with her fellow actors, Allen said, "They gave us lots of tips and mostly [made] sure we were all OK. They were really nice."[24] Eddie Redmayne plays Marius Pontmercy, a student revolutionary who is friends with the Thenardiers' daughter, Éponine, but falls in love with Cosette.[25][26][27] He found director Hooper's vision "incredibly helpful". On collaborating with Hooper, Redmayne said, "He was incredibly collaborative. Certainly during the rehearsal process, we sat with Tom and the Victor Hugo book adding things."[28] It was Redmayne who suggested to Hooper that his character's song, "Empty Chairs at Empty Tables", should begin a cappella in order to better express Marius' guilt and pain. Helena Bonham Carter and Sacha Baron Cohen play the Thénardiers, a pair of swindling innkeepers.[29][30][31] Hooper previously collaborated with Bonham Carter in The King's Speech, in which she portrayed Queen Elizabeth The Queen Mother.[32] Baron Cohen and Bonham Carter previously co-starred in the film adaptation of the musical Sweeney Todd: The Demon Barber of Fleet Street. When Baron Cohen accepted the role of Thénardier, he had to abandon Django Unchained.[33] Samantha Barks played Éponine, the Thénardiers' daughter.[34] Having previously played the role at the 25th Anniversary concert and in the West End production, Barks said "there was similarities in playing the role—they're the same character—but Eponine in the novel and Eponine in the musical are two kind of different girls, so to me it was the thrill of merging those two together, to get something that still had that heart and soul that we all connect to in the musical, but also the awkward, self-loathing teenager that we see in the novel, trying to merge those two together." She found Jackman "fascinating to learn from, and I feel like that's the way it should be done".[35] Aaron Tveit portrayed Enjolras, the leader of Les Amis de l'ABC. Hoping to play Marius, Tveit submitted an audition tape in which he sang "Empty Chairs at Empty Tables" and "In My Life". He had never performed any role in the musical. He also said of Enjolras that "once I got more and more familiar with the material and when I read the novel, I was like, 'Wow this is a really, really great role,' and I felt very much better suited for it." Tveit said the shooting of the film was "almost as grueling as a marathon".[36] Colm Wilkinson and Frances Ruffelle, two of the original cast members involved in the Broadway and West End productions of the English version (as Jean Valjean and Éponine, respectively), make appearances. Wilkinson plays the Bishop of Digne, while Ruffelle plays a prostitute.[37] West End star Hadley Fraser, who previously played Grantaire in the 25th Anniversary Concert and Javert at West End, also makes a cameo as the Army General. Another West End star, Gina Beck, makes a cameo appearance one of the "Turning Women". Michael Jibson plays the foreman of the factory in which Fantine works and is fired from.[31] Several actors in the West End production of the musical appear members of the student society, including George Blagden as Grantaire;[38] Killian Donnelly as Combeferre; Fra Fee as Courfeyrac; Alistair Brammer as Jean Prouvaire; Hugh Skinner as Joly;[39] Gabriel Vick as Feuilly;[40] Iwan Lewis as Bahorel; and Stuart Neal as Bossuet. Blagden was cast in January 2012.[41] Other stage actors including Hannah Waddingham, Daniel Evans and Kerry Ellis have small parts in the film along with actors who previously starred in various productions of Les Misérables.[31][42] Musical numbers[edit] See also: Les Misérables: Highlights from the Motion Picture Soundtrack A highlights soundtrack album was released via Universal Republic 21 December 2012.[43] Republic Records confirmed 25 January 2013, via Twitter that a 2-disc deluxe soundtrack was in production alongside the DVD and Blu-ray; it was released 19 March 2013.[44] The film contains every song from the original stage musical with the exception of "I Saw Him Once" and "Dog Eats Dog", although many songs have been partially or extensively cut. "The Attack on Rue Plumet" and "Little People" were especially shortened. In addition, the Bishop sings with Fantine during "Valjean's Death" instead of Eponine, as was in the stage musical. "Stars" was also moved to before "Look Down", which echoes the original 1985 London production. The lyrics of some songs were also changed to suit the changes in setting or narrative to the stage musical. In addition to the cuts, a new song, "Suddenly" was added, new music was composed for the battle scenes, and the order of several songs changed from the stage musical. Several major pieces, primarily as "Who Am I?", "Stars", and the two "Soliloquy" pieces are performed in a different key than most recordings. "Look Down" – Convicts, Javert, Valjean†§ "On Parole" – Valjean, Bishop of Digne "The Bishop" – Bishop of Digne†§ "Valjean's Soliloquy" – Valjean†§ "At the End of the Day" – Poor, Foreman, Workers, Factory Women, Fantine, Valjean†§ "The Runaway Cart" – Valjean, Javert "The Docks (Lovely Ladies)" – Sailors, Old Woman, Fantine, Crone, Whores, Pimp, Toothman§ "I Dreamed a Dream" – Fantine†§ "Fantine's Arrest" – Bamatabois, Fantine, Javert, Valjean§ "Who Am I?" – Valjean§ "Fantine's Death" – Fantine, Valjean§ "The Confrontation" – Javert, Valjean†§ "Castle on a Cloud" – Young Cosette, Mme. Thénardier†§ "Master of the House" – Thénardier, Mme. Thénardier, Inn Patrons†§ "The Well Scene" – Valjean, Young Cosette§ "The Bargain" – Valjean, Thénardier, Mme. Thénardier§ "The Thénardier Waltz of Treachery" – Thénardier, Valjean, Mme. Thénardier, Young Cosette§ "Suddenly" – Valjean†§ "The Convent" – Valjean§ "Stars" – Javert§ "Paris/Look Down" – Gavroche, Beggars, Enjolras, Marius, Students§ "The Robbery" – Thénardier, Mme. Thénardier, Éponine, Valjean§ "Javert's Intervention" – Javert, Thénardier§ "Éponine's Errand" - Éponine, Marius "ABC Café/Red and Black" – Students, Enjolras, Marius, Grantaire, Gavroche†§ "In My Life" – Cosette, Valjean, Marius, Éponine§ "A Heart Full of Love" – Marius, Cosette, Éponine†§ "The Attack on Rue Plumet" – Thénardier, Thieves, Éponine, Valjean "On My Own" – Éponine†§ "One Day More" – Valjean, Marius, Cosette, Éponine, Enjolras, Javert, Thénardier, Mme. Thénardier, Cast of Les Misérables†§ "Do You Hear the People Sing?" – Enjolras, Marius, Students, Beggars§ "Building the Barricade (Upon These Stones)" – Enjolras, Javert, Gavroche, Students§ "Javert's Arrival" – Javert, Enjolras§ "Little People" – Gavroche, Students, Enjolras, Javert§ "A Little Fall of Rain" – Éponine, Marius§ "Night of Anguish" – Enjolras, Marius, Valjean, Javert, Students "Drink With Me" – Grantaire, Marius, Gavroche, Students†§ "Bring Him Home" – Valjean†§ "Dawn of Anguish" – Enjolras, Marius, Gavroche, Students§ "The Second Attack (Death of Gavroche)" – Gavroche, Enjolras, Students, Army Officer§ "The Sewers" – Valjean, Javert§ "Javert's Suicide" – Javert†§ "Turning" – Parisian women§ "Empty Chairs at Empty Tables" – Marius†§ "A Heart Full of Love [Reprise]" – Marius, Cosette, Valjean, Gillenormand§ "Valjean's Confession" – Valjean, Marius§ "Suddenly [Reprise]" – Marius, Cosette§ "Wedding Chorale" – Chorus, Marius, Thérnardier, Mme. Thérnardier§ "Beggars at the Feast" – Thénardier, Mme. Thénardier§ "Valjean's Death" – Valjean, Fantine, Cosette, Marius, Bishop of Digne†§ "Do You Hear the People Sing? [Reprise]" – The Cast of Les Misérables†§ † Included on the highlights edition soundtrack § Included on the deluxe edition soundtrack Production[edit] Development[edit] In 1988, Alan Parker was considered to direct a film adaptation of the Les Misérables musical. However, in 1991, Bruce Beresford signed on to be the film's director.[45] Producer Cameron Mackintosh had an integral role in facilitating the production of the film. In 1992, producer Cameron Mackintosh announced that the film would be co-produced by TriStar Pictures.[46] However, the film was abandoned. In 2005, Mackintosh later confirmed that interest in turning the musical into a film adaptation had resumed during the early months of that year. Mackintosh said that he wanted the film to be directed by "someone who has a vision for the show that will put the show's original team, including [Mackintosh], back to work." He also said that he wanted the film audiences to make it "fresh as the actual show".[47] In 2009, producer Eric Fellner began negotiations with Mackintosh to acquire the film's rights and concluded it near the end of 2011. Fellner, Tim Bevan, and Debra Hayward engaged William Nicholson to write a screenplay for the film.[14] Nicholson wrote the draft within six weeks time.[14] The DVD/Blu-ray release of Les Misérables: 25th Anniversary Concert confirmed an announcement of the musical's film adaptation.[48] Pre-production[edit] In March 2011, director Tom Hooper began negotiations to direct Les Misérables from the screenplay by William Nicholson.[49] Production on the film officially began in June that year, with Cameron Mackintosh and Working Title Films co-producing. Having already approached Hooper prior to production with the desire of playing Jean Valjean, Hugh Jackman began negotiations to star in the film alongside Paul Bettany as Javert.[50][51] Other stars who became attached to the project included Hathaway and Helena Bonham Carter.[52] In September 2011, Jackman was officially cast as Jean Valjean and Russell Crowe was cast as Javert.[53] The following month, Mackintosh confirmed that Fantine would be played by Hathaway. Before Hathaway was cast, Amy Adams, Jessica Biel, Tammy Blanchard, Kristin Kreuk, Marion Cotillard, Kate Winslet and Rebecca Hall had reportedly been considered for the part.[54] For the role, Hathaway allowed her hair to be cut short on camera for a scene in which her character sells her hair, stating that the lengths she goes to for her roles "don't feel like sacrifices. Getting to transform is one of the best parts of [acting]."[55] The role also required her to lose 25 pounds.[14] In November 2011, Eddie Redmayne joined the cast as Marius Pontmercy.[25] It was reported that the shortlist of actresses for the role of Éponine included Scarlett Johansson (who also auditioned for the role of Fantine), Lea Michele, Tamsin Egerton, Taylor Swift, and Evan Rachel Wood.[56][57] In January 2012, the press reported that the role of Éponine had officially been offered to Taylor Swift, but Swift later stated that those reports were not entirely accurate.[58][59][60][61] At the end of the month, Mackintosh made a special appearance during the curtain call of the Oliver! UK tour at the Palace Theatre, Manchester, announcing that the tour's Nancy, Samantha Barks, who had played Éponine in the West End production and in the 25th Anniversary concert, would reprise the role in the film.[34] Barks had been auditioning for 15 weeks by that point.[62] Originally, an unknown was sought for the role of Cosette, with an open casting call in New York City in December 2011.[63] In January 2012, reports surfaced that Amanda Seyfried had been offered the role instead.[64] Eddie Redmayne confirmed both Seyfried's casting and that of Bonham Carter as Madame Thénardier in an interview on 12 January.[18] Hooper confirmed that he would stick to the musical's essentially sung-through form and would thus introduce very little additional dialogue.[27] Hooper confirmed that the film would not be shot in 3D, expressing his opinion that it would not enhance the emotional narrative of the film and would distract audiences from the storytelling.[65] Following this announcement, reports surfaced in the press that Sacha Baron Cohen had begun talks to join the cast as Thénardier and that Aaron Tveit had been cast as Enjolras.[66][67] Later that month, the press officially confirmed Tveit's casting as Enjolras.[19][20] Colm Wilkinson and Frances Ruffelle (the original Valjean and Éponine, respectively, in the West End and Broadway productions) appeared in the film. Wilkinson played the Bishop of Digne, and Ruffelle had a cameo as a prostitute.[37] George Blagden was cast as Grantaire.[38] In an interview with BBC Radio 4's Front Row, Tom Hooper revealed that Claude-Michel Schönberg will be composing one new song and additional music. The director also expanded on the performers singing live on set, which he felt would eliminate the need to recapture "locked" performances and allow more creative freedom. More details of this were confirmed by Eddie Redmayne in an interview. He stated that the cast would sing to piano tracks (via earpiece) and that the orchestra would be added in post-production.[68] In February 2012, casting auditions involving extras for the film took place at the University of Portsmouth and Chatham Maritime in Chatham.[69] Several days later, Mackintosh officially confirmed that Bonham Carter would play Madame Thénardier.[30] He also announced that the title of the newly created song for the film is "Suddenly" and that it "beautifully explains what happens when Valjean takes Cosette from the inn and looks after her."[70] At the end of the month, The Sun reported that the long-rumoured Baron Cohen had been cast in the role of Monsieur Thénardier.[71] The cast began rehearsals in January 2012, with principal photography due to begin in March.[72] The press officially confirmed Baron Cohen's casting during the latter month.[31] No table read took place before filming.[22] Filming[edit] Tom Hooper directing the second unit of Les Misérables on location in Winchester in April 2012. The film's set at Greenwich Naval College. With a production budget of $61 million,[7] principal photography of the film began 8 March 2012 in Gourdon. Filming locations in England included Boughton House, Winchester College, Winchester Cathedral Close, Her Majesty's Naval Base Portsmouth, Chatham Dockyard,[73] St Mary the Virgin Church, Ewelme, South Oxfordshire[74] and Pinewood Studios.[9][75][76][77] In April 2012, crews built a replica of the Elephant of the Bastille in Greenwich.[78][79] In the novel, Gavroche lives in the decaying monument. On-location filming also took place at Gourdon, Alpes-Maritimes in France. Footage of Hathaway singing "I Dreamed a Dream", a song from the musical, was shown at CinemaCon 26 April 2012. Russell Crowe confirmed 5 June 2012, on Twitter that he had finished filming. He was later followed by Samantha Barks, confirming that all of her scenes had too been completed. Jackman stated that all filming had been completed 23 June 2012.[80] Some late filming occurred in Bath, Somerset, in October 2012 where stunt shots for Javert's suicide scene had to be reshot due to an error found with this footage during post-production. Bath was not the original filming location for this scene, but the late footage was captured at Pulteney Weir.[81] Post-production[edit] The film's vocals were recorded live on set using live piano accompaniments played through earpieces as a guide, with the orchestral accompaniment recorded in post-production, rather than the traditional method where the film's musical soundtracks are usually pre-recorded and played back on set to which actors lip-sync. Production sound mixer Simon Hayes used 50 DPA 4071 lavalier microphones to record the vocals.[82] Hooper explained his choice: “ I just felt ultimately, it was a more natural way of doing it. You know, when actors do dialogue, they have freedom in time, they have freedom in pacing. They can stop for a moment, they can speed up. I simply wanted to give the actors the normal freedoms that they would have. If they need a bit for an emotion or a feeling to form in the eyes before they sing, I can take that time. If they cry, they can cry through a song. When you're doing it to playback, to the millisecond you have to copy what you do. You have no freedom in the moment – and acting is the illusion of being free in the moment.[83] ” Although this unique live recording method has been stated as "a world's first" by the creative team, several film musicals have used this method before, including early talkies, as lip-syncing wasn't perfected, the 1975 20th Century Fox film At Long Last Love, the adaptation of The Magic Flute that same year, and more recently in the 1995 adaptation of The Fantasticks, in the 2001 film version of Hedwig and the Angry Inch, and in the 2007 film Across the Universe with songs by The Beatles. Producers announced 27 August 2012, that recording sessions for Les Misérables would begin in London 10 October and featured a 70-piece orchestra. They was also announced that composer Claude-Michel Schönberg was composing additional music to underscore the film.[84] Universal Studios executives were granted a viewing of the rough cut of the film 9 September 2012, without the orchestra tracks. They greeted the cut with "extreme excitement". Distribution[edit] Marketing[edit] The film's first teaser trailer debuted online 30 May 2012, and later in theatres with Snow White and the Huntsman, The Bourne Legacy and Argo.[85] Producers released an extended first look on the film's official Facebook page 20 September 2012. This short introduces and explains Hooper's method of recording vocals live on set, comparing it to the traditional method of pre-recording the vocals in a studio months in advance. Hugh Jackman stated that filming in this way allows him more creative freedom with the material and that he "only has to worry about acting it." Both Hooper and the actors believe that this choice of production method will make the film feel much more emotional, raw, and real. The actors praised Hooper for his method and provide brief interviews throughout the video. Hooper mentions, "I thought it was an amazing opportunity to do something genuinely groundbreaking."[86] Clips of Jackman, Hathaway, Seyfried, Redmayne and Barks singing were received very positively, especially the teaser trailer's presentation of "I Dreamed a Dream" by Hathaway. Producers released a new poster, featuring young Cosette, played by Isabelle Allen, 24 September 2012, on the film's official Facebook page.[87] They released posters featuring Jean Valjean, Javert, Fantine, and Cosette 12 October,[88] with additional posters of Thénardiers and Marius released 1 November 2012. Release[edit] Les Misérables was originally to be released 7 December 2012 before the studio moved it to 14 December; however, 18 September 2012, they delayed the film's release date to 25 December, so as not to conflict with the opening of The Hobbit: An Unexpected Journey, which opened 14 December. Because of this, it opened alongside Django Unchained.[10] Release date for the United Kingdom was 11 January 2013.[89] Les Misérables was screened for the first time at the Lincoln Center in New York City, 23 November 2012, and received a standing ovation from the crowd.[90][91] This was followed by a screening the next day in Los Angeles, which also received positive reviews.[92] Les Misérables premiered 5 December 2012, at the Empire, Leicester Square in London.[2] Red carpet footage was screened live online in an event hosted by Michael Ball, the original Marius of the West End. The film was released in select IMAX theatres in New York, Los Angeles, Toronto, and Montreal the same day as its domestic theatrical release, 25 December 2012.[93] Les Misérables was released internationally by IMAX theatres on 10 January 2013.[93] Home media[edit] The film was confirmed for home release 13 May 2013 on DVD, Blu-ray, and VOD in the United Kingdom; it was released in the United States 22 March 2013. The DVD contains three featurettes: The Stars of Les Misérables, Creating the Perfect Paris, and The Original Masterwork: Victor Hugo's Les Misérables, along with an audio commentary from director Tom Hooper. The Blu-ray has all DVD features including four additional featurettes: Les Misérables Singing Live, Battle at the Barricade, The West End Connection, and Les Misérables On Location.[94] Reception[edit] Box office[edit] Les Misérables earned $148,809,770 in North America and $293,000,000 in other territories for a worldwide total of $441,809,770.[8] In North America, Les Misérables opened 25 December 2012 in 2,808 theatres, placing first at the box office with $18.1 million.[95] This amount broke the record for the highest opening day gross for a musical film, previously held by High School Musical 3: Senior Year, and was also the second highest opening day gross for a film released on Christmas Day.[96] It earned $27.3 million in its opening weekend, placing third behind Django Unchained and The Hobbit: An Unexpected Journey.[97] The film was released in the United Kingdom 11 January 2013 and earned £8.1 ($13.1) million in its opening weekend, making it the largest opening weekend for a musical film, as well as for Working Title.[98] Critical response[edit] The review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes reported a 70% approval rating with an average rating of 6.9/10, based on an aggregation of 228 reviews. The site's consensus reads: "Impeccably mounted but occasionally bombastic, Les Misérables largely succeeds thanks to bravura performances from its distinguished cast."[99] On Metacritic, the film achieved an average score of 63 out of 100 based on 41 reviews, signifying "generally favorable reviews".[100] The film was generally praised for its acting and ensemble cast, with Jackman and Hathaway being singled out for praise. The live singing, which was heavily promoted in marketing for the film, received a more divided response. Robbie Collin of The Daily Telegraph gave the film five stars: "Les Misérables is a blockbuster, and the special effects are emotional: explosions of grief; fireballs of romance; million-buck conflagrations of heartbreak. Accordingly, you should see it in its opening week, on a gigantic screen, with a fanatical crowd."[101] The Guardian's Peter Bradshaw concurred: "Even as a non-believer in this kind of "sung-through" musical, I was battered into submission by this mesmeric and sometimes compelling film ...".[102] Kenneth Turan of the Los Angeles Times gave a positive review, saying that the film "is a clutch player that delivers an emotional wallop when it counts. You can walk into the theater as an agnostic, but you may just leave singing with the choir."[103] Peter Travers of Rolling Stone said, "Besides being a feast for the eyes and ears, Les Misérables overflows with humor, heartbreak, rousing action and ravishing romance. Damn the imperfections, it's perfectly marvelous."[104] Todd McCarthy of The Hollywood Reporter said, "As the enduring success of this property has shown, there are large, emotionally susceptible segments of the population ready to swallow this sort of thing, but that doesn't mean it's good."[105] Manohla Dargis of The New York Times wrote: "[Director Tom] Hooper can be very good with actors. But his inability to leave any lily ungilded—to direct a scene without tilting or hurtling or throwing the camera around—is bludgeoning and deadly. By the grand finale, when tout le monde is waving the French tricolor in victory, you may instead be raising the white flag in exhausted defeat."[106] Justin Chang of Variety wrote that the film "will more than satisfy the show's legions of fans." Chang praised the performances of Jackman, Hathaway, Barks, Tveit and Seyfried (i.e., every leading cast member except Crowe and Redmayne) but said that the film's editing "seems reluctant to slow down and let the viewer simply take in the performances."[107] Callum Marsh of Slant Magazine gave the film 1 star, and wrote: "Flaws—and there are a great many that would have never made the cut were this a perfectible studio recording—are conveniently swept under the rug of candid expression ... the worst quality of Les Misérables's live singing is simply that it puts too much pressure on a handful of performers who frankly cannot sing.... Fisheye lenses and poorly framed close-ups abound in Les Misérables, nearly every frame a revelation of one man's bad taste ... One would be hard-pressed to describe this, despite the wealth of beauty on display, as anything but an ugly film, shot and cut ineptly. Everything in the film, songs included, is cranked to 11, the melodrama of it all soaring. So it's odd that this kind of showboating maximalism should be ultimately reduced to a few fisheye'd faces, mugging for their close-up, as the people sing off-key and broken."[108] The Chicago Tribune critic Michael Philips gave the film only one and a half stars, writing: "The camera bobs and weaves like a drunk, frantically. So you have hammering close-ups, combined with woozy insecurity each time more than two people are in the frame. ...too little in this frenzied mess of a film registers because Hooper is trying to make everything register at the same nutty pitch."[109] Some specific performances were reviewed very positively. Anne Hathaway's performance of ballad "I Dreamed a Dream" was met with praise, with many comparing its showstopper-like quality to Jennifer Hudson's performance of "And I Am Telling You I'm Not Going" from Dreamgirls.[110] Christopher Orr of The Atlantic wrote that "Hathaway gives it everything she has, beginning in quiet sorrow before building to a woebegone climax: she gasps, she weeps, she coughs. If you are blown away by the scene—as many will be; it will almost certainly earn Hathaway her first Oscar—this may be the film for you."[111] Ann Hornaday of The Washington Post writes that "The centerpiece of a movie composed entirely of centerpieces belongs to Anne Hathaway, who as the tragic heroine Fantine sings another of the memorable numbers".[112] Joy Tipping of The Dallas Morning News described Hathaway's performance as "angelic".[113] Claudia Puig of USA Today describes her as "superb as the tragic Fantine".[114] Travers felt that "A dynamite Hathaway shatters every heart when she sings how 'life has killed the dream I dreamed.' Her volcanic performance has Oscar written all over it."[104] Lou Lumenick, critic for the New York Post, wrote that the film is "worth seeing for Hathaway alone".[115] She was widely considered to be the frontrunner for the Academy Award for Best Supporting Actress,[116] ultimately winning it. Eddie Redmayne also received considerable praise for his performance with Bloomberg News saying that "Eddie Redmayne—most recently seen as the eager young production assistant in My Week with Marilyn—delivers by far the most moving and memorable performance in the film as the young firebrand Marius, who, along with his fellow students, is caught up in France's political upheavals in the 19th century."[117] Samantha Barks earned praise for her portrayal of Éponine, with Digital Journal saying: "Samantha Barks plays Éponine with such grace, sweetness, and sadness that it is hard to imagine anyone else in the role",[118] while Claudia Puig of USA Today calls her "heartbreakingly soulful",[114] Richard Roeper of The Chicago Sun-Times describes her performance as "star-making",[119] and Roger Friedman of Showbiz411.com says she "just about steals the film".[120] Crowe's performance was less well received and even Crowe agreed that the film suffered from poor vocal performances. Emma Gosnell, writing for The Daily Telegraph, stated that she walked out of the showing due to the poor singing, specifically citing Crowe and Jackman as the cause. Playback singer Marni Nixon said "[Crowe] was nothing. It wasn’t that he was choosing to sing like that, he just couldn't do anything else" and that Jackman acted well but "could have done with a nobler voice". She also criticised Bonham Carter as being incomprehensible, but praised the rest of the female cast.[121] American Idol runner-up Adam Lambert tweeted several disparaging messages, including "why not cast actors who could actually sound good?" and "the singing was so distracting at times it pulled me out", to which Crowe replied via Twitter "I don't disagree with Adam,sure it could have been sweetened,Hooper wanted it raw and real,that's how it is".[122] Nixon rebutted this: "We're talking about a musical. Is that real? People don't go around singing 'La la la la' to each other all day!"[121] In 2013, the film was nominated for eight Academy Awards, including the Best Picture, Best Actor in a Leading Role for Hugh Jackman,[123] and went on to win in three categories: Best Supporting Actress for Anne Hathaway, Best Makeup and Hairstyling, and Best Sound Mixing. Accolades[edit] List of awards and nominations Award Date of ceremony Category Nominee Result Ref Academy Award 24 February 2013 Best Picture Tim Bevan, Eric Fellner, Debra Hayward, and Cameron Mackintosh Nominated [123] Best Actor Hugh Jackman Nominated Best Supporting Actress Anne Hathaway Won Best Original Song "Suddenly" (music by Claude-Michel Schönberg, lyrics by Herbert Kretzmer and Alain Boublil) Nominated Best Costume Design Paco Delgado Nominated Best Makeup and Hairstyling Lisa Westcott and Julie Dartnell Won Best Sound Mixing Andy Nelson, Mark Paterson, and Simon Hayes Won Best Production Design Eve Stewart and Anna Lynch-Robinson Nominated American Film Institute 11 January 2013 Movies of the Year Won [124] Australian Academy of Cinema and Television Arts Award 28 January 2013 Best International Film Tim Bevan, Eric Fellner, Debra Hayward, and Cameron Mackintosh Nominated [125] Best International Actor Hugh Jackman Nominated British Academy Film Award 10 February 2013 Best Film Nominated [126] Best British Film Nominated Best Actor in a Leading Role Hugh Jackman Nominated Best Actress in a Supporting Role Anne Hathaway Won Best Cinematography Danny Cohen Nominated Best Costume Design Paco Delgado Nominated Best Makeup and Hair Lisa Westcott Won Best Sound Simon Hayes, Andy Nelson, Mark Paterson, Jonathan Allen, Lee Walpole, and John Warhurst Won Best Production Design Eve Stewart and Anna Lynch-Robinson Won Broadcast Film Critics Association Awards 10 January 2013 Best Film Nominated [127] Best Acting Ensemble The Cast of Les Misérables Nominated Best Actor Hugh Jackman Nominated Best Supporting Actress Anne Hathaway Won Best Director Tom Hooper Nominated Best Song "Suddenly" Nominated Best Cinematography Danny Cohen Nominated Best Art Direction Eve Stewart and Anna Lynch-Robinson Nominated Best Editing Chris Dickens and Melanie Oliver Nominated Best Costume Design Paco Delgado Nominated Best Makeup Lisa Westcott Won Chicago Film Critics Association 17 December 2012 Best Supporting Actress Anne Hathaway Nominated [128] Best Art Direction Eve Stewart and Anna Lynch-Robinson Nominated Most Promising Performer Samantha Barks Nominated Directors Guild of America Award 2 February 2013 Outstanding Directorial Achievement in Motion Pictures Tom Hooper Nominated Dorian Awards 17 January 2013 Film of the Year Nominated [129][130] Film Performance of the Year - Actor Hugh Jackman Nominated Film Performance of the Year - Actress Anne Hathaway Won Visually Striking Film of the Year Nominated Golden Globe Award 13 January 2013 Best Motion Picture – Musical or Comedy Won [131] Best Actor – Motion Picture Musical or Comedy Hugh Jackman Won Best Supporting Actress – Motion Picture Anne Hathaway Won Best Original Song "Suddenly" Nominated Grammy Awards 26 January 2014 Best Compilation Soundtrack for Visual Media Cameron Mackintosh, Lee McCutcheon and Stephan Metcalfe Nominated [132] Hollywood Film Festival 23 October 2012 Best Trailer Erin Wyatt Won [133] Producer of the Year Tim Bevan, Eric Fellner, Debra Hayward, and Cameron Mackintosh Won Spotlight Award Samantha Barks Won Houston Film Critics Society 5 January 2013 Best Picture Nominated Best Director Tom Hooper Nominated Best Actor Hugh Jackman Nominated Best Supporting Actress Anne Hathaway Won Best Cinematography Danny Cohen Nominated Best Original Song "Suddenly" Won 5th Annual Lancashire Film Critics Awards 30 March 2013 Best Film Won [134] Best Director Tom Hooper Won London Film Critics Circle 20 January 2013 British Film of the Year Nominated Actor of the Year Hugh Jackman Nominated Supporting Actress of the Year Anne Hathaway Won Young British Performer of the Year Samantha Barks Nominated Los Angeles Film Critics Association 9 December 2012 Best Supporting Actress Anne Hathaway (also for The Dark Knight Rises) Nominated MTV Movie Awards 14 April 2013 Best Female Performance Anne Hathaway Nominated [135] Best Breakthrough Performance Eddie Redmayne Nominated Best Musical Moment Anne Hathaway Nominated New York Film Critics Circle Award 3 December 2012 Best Supporting Actress Anne Hathaway (also for The Dark Knight Rises) Nominated New York Film Critics Online 3 December 2012 Movies of the Year Won Best Supporting Actress Anne Hathaway Won Producers Guild of America Award 26 January 2013 Best Theatrical Motion Picture Tim Bevan, Eric Fellner, Debra Hayward, and Cameron Mackintosh Nominated [136] Satellite Award 16 December 2012 Best Film Nominated [137] Best Cast – Motion Picture The Cast of Les Misérables Won Best Actor – Motion Picture Hugh Jackman Nominated Best Supporting Actor – Motion Picture Eddie Redmayne Nominated Best Supporting Actress – Motion Picture Anne Hathaway Won Samantha Barks Nominated Best Art Direction and Production Design Eve Stewart and Anna Lynch-Robinson Nominated Best Costume Design Paco Delgado Nominated Best Editing Chris Dickens and Melanie Oliver Nominated Best Original Song "Suddenly" Won Best Sound John Warhurst, Lee Walpole, and Simon Hayes Won Saturn Awards 26 June 2013 Best Action / Adventure Nominated [138] Best Actor Hugh Jackman Nominated Best Supporting Actress Anne Hathaway Nominated Best Performance by a Younger Actor Daniel Huttlestone Nominated Best Costume Paco Delgado Won Best Production Design Eve Stewart Nominated Screen Actors Guild Award 27 January 2013 Outstanding Performance by a Cast in a Motion Picture The Cast of Les Misérables Nominated [139] Outstanding Performance by a Male Actor in a Leading Role Hugh Jackman Nominated Outstanding Performance by a Female Actor in a Supporting Role Anne Hathaway Won Outstanding Performance by a Stunt Ensemble in a Motion Picture Nominated Washington D.C. Area Film Critics Association 10 December 2012 Best Film Nominated [140] Best Acting Ensemble The Cast of Les Misérables Won Best Actor Hugh Jackman Nominated Best Supporting Actress Samantha Barks Nominated Anne Hathaway Won Best Director Tom Hooper Nominated Best Art Direction Eve Stewart and Anna Lynch-Robinson Nominated Best Cinematography Danny Cohen Nominated Young Artist Award 5 May 2013 Best Performance in a Feature Film - Supporting Young Actor Daniel Huttlestone Nominated [141] Best Performance in a Feature Film - Supporting Young Actress Ten and Under Isabelle Allen Won References[edit] ^ "Production Notes" (PDF). Universal Pictures. Archived from the original (PDF) on 15 October 2013. Retrieved 10 January 2013.  ^ a b c "Les Miserables film gets world premiere in London". The Telegraph. 6 December 2012. Retrieved 7 December 2012.  ^ "Les Miserables". British Board of Film Classification. 28 November 2012. Retrieved 29 December 2012.  ^ Bradshaw, Peter (10 January 2013). "'Les Miserables'". The Guardian (London). Retrieved 14 January 2013.  ^ "'Les Miserables'". Odeon. Retrieved 14 January 2013.  ^ "Les Miserables (2012)". British Film Institute. Retrieved April 8, 2016.  ^ a b Breznican, Anthony (31 October 2012). "Les Miz Soars Again". Entertainment Weekly. Retrieved 7 November 2012.  ^ a b c d "Les Misérables (2012)". Box Office Mojo. Retrieved 19 April 2013.  ^ a b "Twitter Watch: Hugh Jackman". BroadwayWorld.com. 8 March 2012. Retrieved 28 July 2012.  ^ a b Fowler, Tara (18 September 2012). "'Les Misérables' moves release date to Christmas Day". Entertainment Weekly. Retrieved 18 September 2012.  ^ "Metacritic provided reviews".  ^ Anne Hathaway wins Oscar for role in Les Misérables ^ a b "Russell Crowe Joins Les Misérables". ComingSoon.net. 8 September 2011. Retrieved 10 September 2011.  ^ a b c d e f g Galloway, Stephen (5 December 2012). "Inside the Fight to Bring 'Les Mis' to the Screen". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved 27 December 2012.  ^ Dawn, Randie (27 December 2012). "'Les Miz': Hugh Jackman prepped with weights, washcloths, desire". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved 27 December 2012.  ^ "Hugh Jackman on Les Misérables, His Brutal Training Regimen, and His Javert Past". Retrieved 28 January 2013.  ^ Harp, Justin (26 December 2012). "Russell Crowe reveals 'Les Misérables' doubts: 'I didn't like Javert'". Digital Spy. Retrieved 27 December 2012.  ^ a b Fowler, Tara; Reynolds, Simon (11 January 2012). "'Les Misérables' has an amazing cast, says Eddie Redmayne". Digital Spy. Retrieved 28 July 2012.  ^ a b Kit, Borys (17 January 2012). "'Les Miserables' Movie Casts 'Gossip Girl' Actor Aaron Tveit as Rebellion Leader". The Hollywood Rreporter. Retrieved 24 November 2012.  ^ a b Jones, Kenneth (18 January 2012). "Catch Him If You Can: Aaron Tveit Will Play Enjolras in Les Miz Film". Playbill. Retrieved 24 November 2012.  ^ Patches, Matt (24 December 2012). "'Les Mis' Star Amanda Seyfried on Cosette: 'We Needed to Find Ways to Make Her Interesting'". Hollywood.com. Retrieved 27 December 2012.  ^ a b Ryzik, Melena (4 December 2012). "Amanda Seyfried and the Hathaway Extraction". The New York Times. Retrieved 31 January 2013.  ^ "Young Cosette cast in Les Misérables". Screen Terrier. 22 March 2012. Retrieved 28 July 2012.  ^ Schillaci, Sophie A. (11 December 2012). "Meet the 10-Year-Old Face of 'Les Miserables'". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved 27 December 2012.  ^ a b Labrecque, Jeff (1 November 2011). "Eddie Redmayne lands 'Les Misérables' role". Entertainment Weekly. Retrieved 28 July 2012.  ^ "Les Misérables Adds Eddie Redmayne". CommingSoon.net. 1 November 2011. Retrieved 28 July 2012.  ^ a b "Eddie Redmayne flexes vocal chords for Les Misérables". BBC News. 12 January 2012.  ^ Rosen, Christopher (18 December 2012). "Eddie Redmayne, 'Les Miserables' Star, On Sets That Smell Like Dead Fish & Singing Till You Bleed". Huffington Post. Retrieved 27 December 2012.  ^ "Eddie Redmayne On His Les Misérables 'Love-In' With Amanda Seyfried and Helena Bonham Carter". Broadway.com. 12 January 2012. Retrieved 28 July 2012.  ^ a b Jones, Kenneth (9 February 2012). "Mistress of the House: Helena Bonham Carter Will Be Madame Thénardier in Les Miz Movie". Playbill. Retrieved 28 July 2012.  ^ a b c d Jones, Kenneth (16 March 2012). "Sacha Baron Cohen, Daniel Evans, Linzi Hateley and More Confirmed for 'Les Miz' Film". Playbill. Retrieved 22 January 2013.  ^ "Helena Bonham Carter's many faces". BBC News. 31 December 2011. Retrieved 1 February 2012.  ^ Rosen, Christopher (3 January 2013). "Sacha Baron Cohen: 'Les Miserables' Role Forced Him To Drop 'Django Unchained'". Huffington Post. Retrieved 4 January 2013.  ^ a b "Samantha Barks to Play Éponine in film of Les Misérables". BroadwayWorld.com. 31 January 2012. Retrieved 28 July 2012.  ^ Zakarin, Jordan (11 December 2012). "'Les Miserables' Breakout Star Samantha Barks Takes Eponine From Stage to Screen". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved 27 December 2012.  ^ Evans, Suzy (16 December 2012). "Aaron Tveit on 'Les Miz,' His New TV Series, and His Broadway Dreams". Backstage. Retrieved 27 December 2012.  ^ a b Bamigboye, Baz (27 January 2012). "Stars of original Les Misérables get an encore they join the cast of new big screen remake". Daily Mail (London). Retrieved 27 January 2012.  ^ a b Ge, Linda (29 January 2012). "Exclusive: Newcomer George Blagden joins Tom Hooper's 'Les Misérables' as Grantaire". Up and Comers. Retrieved 25 September 2012.  ^ "Hugh Skinner CV". MarkhamFroggattandIrwin.com. Retrieved 27 July 2012. [non-primary source needed] ^ "Gabriel Vick Official Twitter". Twitter.com. 9 April 2012. Retrieved 29 July 2012. [non-primary source needed] ^ "George Blagden Signs On to Play Grantaire in LES MISERABLES Film". BroadwayWorld.com. 30 January 2012. Retrieved 4 January 2013.  ^ "More Stage Vets Set for LES MISÉRABLES Film". BroadwayWorld.com. 15 March 2012. Retrieved 25 September 2012.  ^ "Les Misérables Film Soundtrack Will Have Dec. 26 Release". Playbill. 27 November 2012. Retrieved 30 December 2012.  ^ "Twitter/RepublicRecords". Twitter.com. 25 January 2013. Retrieved 27 January 2013.  ^ Schaefer, Stephen (18 October 1991). "Musical Chairs – Turning Musicals into Film – 'Les Misérables', 'Cats', and 'Phantom of the Opera' Have Had a Hard Time Making It to the Big Screen". Entertainment Weekly. Retrieved 6 March 2011.  ^ "Cameron Mackintosh's Production of Les Misérables Celebrates Its 2,000th Performance on Thursday, March 5 and Its Fifth Anniversary" (Press release). LesMis.com. 12 February 1992. Archived from the original on 23 October 2006. Retrieved 6 March 2011.  ^ "Les Misérables Hits Hollywood". ContactMusic.com. 2 October 2005. Retrieved 6 March 2011.  ^ Les Misérables in Concert: The 25th Anniversary (Blu-ray). London: Universal Pictures. 29 November 2010. Coming Soon – Universal Pictures proudly announce the musical motion picture of Les Misérables: A Working Title-Cameron Mackintosh Film  ^ Kroll, Justin (24 March 2011). "Hooper negotiating to direct ‘Les Mis’". Variety. Retrieved 9 November 2014.  ^ Kit, Borys (15 June 2011). "Hugh Jackman in Talks to Star in 'Les Misérables' Adaptation". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved 29 October 2011.  ^ Fleming, Mike. "If Hugh Jackman Plays Jean Valjean, Will Paul Bettany Play Javert In 'Les Misérables'?". Deadline.com. Retrieved 29 October 2011.  ^ Uddin, Zakia (30 August 2011). "Anne Hathaway, Russell Crowe to star in 'Les Misérables'?". Digital Spy. Retrieved 24 September 2012.  ^ Jones, Kenneth (9 September 2011). "Hugh Jackman Is Russell Crowe's Quarry in Les Misérables Film". Playbill. Retrieved 29 October 2011.  ^ "Cameron Mackintosh Confirms Anne Hathaway for LES MISÉRABLES Film". BroadwayWorld.com. 17 October 2011. Retrieved 28 July 2012.  ^ "Photos from The Dark Knight Rises". Yahoo! Movies. 16 July 2012. Retrieved 13 August 2012.  ^ Zakarin, Jordan (30 November 2011). "'Les Misérables' Competition: Taylor Swift, Lea Michele, Scarlett Johansson & Evan Rachel Wood". The Huffington Post. Retrieved 28 July 2012.  ^ Wontorek, Paul. "Cat Star Scarlett Johansson on Her Les Miz Film Audition, Her Dream Role and How Ben Walker's Butt is the Ultimate Picker-Upper". Broadway.com. Retrieved 12 February 2013.  ^ Mann, Camille (4 January 2012). "Taylor Swift reportedly offered role of Eponine in 'Les Mis' film". CBS News. Retrieved 19 January 2012.  ^ "Amanda Seyfried & Taylor Swift Complete LES MISÉRABLES Film Cast". BroadwayWorld.com. 3 January 2012. Retrieved 25 September 2012.  ^ "Taylor Swift Not Bothered About Losing Les Mis Role". ShowbizSpy.com. 19 February 2012. Retrieved 25 September 2012. “I didn't miss out on the role for Les Miserables because I never got the role,” says Taylor.”  ^ Malkin, Marc; Malec, Brett (19 February 2012). "Whitney Houston: "She Was Relatable," Says Taylor Swift". E!. Retrieved 25 September 2012. Things sometimes don't happen and it happens all the time, that things don't come together," she said. "But the thing about my life is that everybody seems to know all these different versions of stories that may or may not be true.  ^ "Q&A: Samantha Barks On Les Misérables". Awardsline. 21 December 2012. Retrieved 13 January 2013.  ^ "Want to Be Cosette in the LES MIS Film? Open Call 12/10 in NYC". BroadwayWorld.com. 2 December 2011. Retrieved 25 September 2012.  ^ Brown, Todd (3 January 2012). "Breaking: Amanda Seyfried Offered Cosette in Tom Hooper's Les Misérables". TwitchFilm.com. Retrieved 3 January 2012.  ^ Masters, Tim (5 December 2011). "Tom Hooper rejects 3D for Les Misérables movie". BBC News. Retrieved 21 September 2012.  ^ Labrecque, Jeff (8 December 2011). "Sacha Baron Cohen in talks for 'Les Misérables'". Entertainment Weekly. Retrieved 28 July 2012.  ^ "Aaron Tveit Joins LES MISÉRABLES Film as Enjolras". BroadwayWorld.com. 8 December 2011. Retrieved 29 July 2012.  ^ "New song for Les Misérables". BBC News. 12 January 2012.  ^ "Auditions held in Chatham today for Les Misérables". KentOnline.co.uk. 3 February 2012. Retrieved 3 February 2012.  ^ "One Song More! Les Miz Film Will Have New Song and Live Singing; Cameron Mackintosh Reveals All". Playbill. 8 February 2012. Retrieved 9 February 2012.  ^ Smart, Gordon (26 February 2012). "Sacha Baron Cohen Lands Part in Les Misérables". The Sun (London). Retrieved 4 January 2013.  ^ "Hugh Jackman Confirms LES MISÉRABLES to Begin Rehearsing in January, Film in March". BroadwayWorld.com. 27 December 2011. Retrieved 1 January 2012.  ^ "Les Misérables (2013)". Kent Film Office. 3 January 2013. Retrieved 9 November 2014.  ^ Hughes, Pete (12 January 2013). "Hollywood thrills for village used in Les Mis blockbuster". Herald Series. Retrieved 16 February 2014.  ^ Larkin, Mike (22 March 2012). "Why so Misérable? Hugh Jackman looks glum and bedraggled as he films scenes for musical adaptation". Daily Mail (London). Retrieved 23 March 2012.  ^ Smart, Gordon (24 March 2012). "Russell Crowe is so Miserables". The Sun (London). Retrieved 24 March 2012.  ^ "Les Misérables set for a different kind of stage". Pinewood Shepperton. 16 March 2012. Retrieved 24 March 2012.  ^ Clayton, Steve (February 2013). "Film Review: Les Misérables". The Socialist Party of Great Britain. Retrieved 15 September 2014.  ^ "Visit 'Les Miserables' Movie Filming Sights in Paris, France & London". Inspired Diversions. 11 February 2013. Retrieved 15 September 2014.  ^ "Hugh Jackman Official Twitter". Twitter.com. Retrieved 24 September 2012. [non-primary source needed] ^ "Hollywood comes to Bath as Les Miserables filmed at Pulteney Weir". Bath Chronicle. 23 October 2012. Retrieved 9 November 2014.  ^ "DPA Mics record Les Misérables". Digital Video 21 (2) (New York: Newbay Media). February 2013. p. 8.  ^ Ryzik, Melena (3 December 2012). "The ‘Les Miz' Folks, Singing Even After Production Wraps". The New York Times. Retrieved 31 January 2013.  ^ Hetrick, Adam; Jones, Kenneth (27 August 2012). "Les Misérables Film to Feature 70-Piece Orchestra; Recording to Begin in October". Playbill. Retrieved 30 August 2012.  ^ "'Les Misérables' Trailer: Anne Hathaway Sings!". ScreenCrush.com. Retrieved 30 May 2012.  ^ "'Les Misérables' Extended First Look". YouTube.com. Retrieved 24 September 2012.  ^ "'Les Misérables' Movie Poster released". CBS News. 25 September 2012. Retrieved 26 September 2012.  ^ Chitwood, Adam (12 October 2012). "4 Character Posters for LES MISERABLES Featuring Hugh Jackman, Russell Crowe, Anne Hathaway, and Amanda Seyfried". Collider.com. Retrieved 1 December 2012.  ^ Eames, Tom (18 September 2012). "'Les Misérables' release date moved to Christmas Day in US". Digital Spy. Retrieved 9 November 2014.  ^ Hogan, Michael (24 November 2012). "'Les Misérables' Screening Earns Standing Ovation For Tom Hooper, Anne Hathaway". The Huffington Post. Retrieved 26 November 2012.  ^ Tapley, Kristopher (23 November 2012). "'Tom Hooper unveils 'Les Misérables' to over-the-moon, theater-loving NYC audience". HitFix. Retrieved 26 November 2012.  ^ Olsen, Mark (26 November 2012). "Tom Hooper reveals his song and dance with 'Les Miserables'". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved 27 November 2012.  ^ a b Schou, Solvej (4 December 2012). "'Les Miserables' digitally remastered to open in select IMAX theaters". Entertainment Weekly. Retrieved 27 January 2013.  ^ "Les Miserables Available on Blu-ray, DVD and On Demand March 22". CraveOnline. 12 February 2013.  ^ Cunningham, Todd (24 December 2012). "'Django Unchained' vs. 'Les Miserables': Battle of Sexes at the Multiplexes". The Wrap News. Retrieved 25 December 2012.  ^ Subers, Ray (26 December 2012). "Christmas Report: Great Debuts for 'Les Mis,' 'Django'". Box Office Mojo. Retrieved 26 December 2012.  ^ "Weekend Report: 'Hobbit' Holds Off 'Django' on Final Weekend of 2012". Box Office Mojo. Retrieved 31 December 2012.  ^ Sandwell, Ian (14 January 2013). "Les Misérables hits high note at UK box office". Screen International. Retrieved 14 January 2013.  ^ "Les Misérables". Rotten Tomatoes. Flixster. Retrieved 1 September 2013.  ^ "Les Miserables". Metacritic. Retrieved 4 January 2013.  ^ Collin, Robbie (10 January 2013). "Les Misérables, review". Daily Telegraph (London). Retrieved 10 January 2013.  ^ Bradshaw, Peter (10 January 2013). "Les Miserables – review". The Guardian (London). Retrieved 10 January 2013.  ^ Turan, Kenneth (24 December 2012). "Review: Vive 'Les Miserables' in all its over-the-top glory". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved 25 December 2012.  ^ a b Travers, Peter (21 December 2012). "Les Misérables". Rolling Stone. Retrieved 25 December 2012.  ^ McCarthy, Todd (6 December 2012). "Les Miserables: Film Review". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved 25 December 2012.  ^ Dargis, Manohla (24 December 2012). "The Wretched Lift Their Voices". The New York Times. Retrieved 25 December 2012.  ^ Chang, Justin (6 December 2012). "Les Misérables". Variety. Retrieved 25 December 2012.  ^ Marsh, Callum (7 December 2012). "Film Review: Les Misérables". Slant Magazine. Retrieved 9 November 2014.  ^ Phillips, Michael (20 December 2012). "'Les Miserables': Looks like the front row". Chicago Tribune. Retrieved 9 November 2014.  ^ "Les Miserables Review: Hit the High Notes?". Movie Fanatic. 24 December 2012. Retrieved 30 December 2012.  ^ Orr, Christopher. "The Extravagant Melodrama of 'Les Miserables'". The Atlantic. Retrieved 30 December 2012.  ^ Hornaday, Ann. "Critic Review for Les Miserables". The Washington Post. Retrieved 30 December 2012.  ^ Tipping, Joy (24 December 2012). "'Les Misérables' gloriously uplifting, heartening and hopeful". The Dallas Morning News. Retrieved 30 December 2012.  ^ a b Puig, Claudia (26 December 2012). "'Les Misérables' is luminous, enchanting". USA Today. Retrieved 30 December 2012.  ^ Lumenick, Lou (20 December 2012). "'Les Miserables' movie review". New York Post. Retrieved 30 December 2012.  ^ "Reelviews Movie Reviews". Reelviews.net. Retrieved 30 December 2012.  ^ "Les Miserables review: Breakout performances but falls short overall". Voxxi. Bloomberg News. 26 December 2012. Retrieved 9 November 2014.  ^ Chen-See, Sherene. "Op-Ed: Samantha Barks is heavenly as Éponine in Les Misérables". Digitaljournal.com. Retrieved 30 December 2012.  ^ Roeper, Richard. "'Les Miserables' Review". Richard Roeper & The Movies. Retrieved 9 November 2014.  ^ Friedman, Roger (23 November 2012). "First Review: "Les Miserables" Comes to Movies with Hugh Jackman, Russell Crowe, Anne Hathaway". Showbiz411.com. Retrieved 25 March 2013.  ^ a b "Why I walked out of Les Miserables". Retrieved 15 July 2015.  ^ "'I don't disagree': Russell Crowe backs Adam Lambert's criticism of Les Miserables' 'distracting' singing". Retrieved 15 July 2015.  ^ a b "2013 Oscar Nominees". Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences. 10 January 2013. Retrieved 10 January 2013.  ^ Breznican, Anthony (10 December 2012). "'The Dark Knight Rises' ranks on American Film Institute's best-movies list". Entertainment Weekly. Retrieved 13 December 2012.  ^ Garry, Maddox (9 January 2013). "Jackman, Kidman up for AACTA awards". The Sydney Morning Herald. Retrieved 11 January 2013.  ^ "'Lincoln leads Bafta shortlist with ten nominations". BBC News. 9 January 2013. Retrieved 9 January 2013.  ^ "'Lincoln' Leads the 18th Annual Critics' Choice Movie Awards Nominations with a Record 13 Noms". Broadcast Film Critics Association. 11 December 2012. Retrieved 13 December 2012.  ^ "2012 Chicago Film Critics Awards". Chicago Film Critics Association. Retrieved 17 December 2012.  ^ Kilday, Gregg (9 January 2013). "Gay and Lesbian Entertainment Critics Announce Dorian Award Nominees". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved 30 January 2014.  ^ "Gay Critics Name Hathaway, "Argo"…And "Liz & Dick" Winners Of 2013 Dorian Awards". Queerty. 17 January 2013. Retrieved 30 January 2014.  ^ Anisiobi, J J (13 December 2012). "British stars lead the way as Helen Mirren, Benedict Cumberbatch and Adele are nominated for Golden Globe Awards". Daily Mail (London). Retrieved 13 December 2012.  ^ "56th Annual Grammy Awards Nominees". The Recording Academy. Retrieved 7 December 2013.  ^ "Hollywood Film Awards to Honor LES MIS' Samantha Barks". Broadway World. 17 October 2012. Retrieved 11 December 2012.  ^ "5th Annual Lancashire Film Critics Awards - Awards Daily". Awards Daily. 30 March 2013. Retrieved 2 April 2013.  ^ Warner, Denise (14 April 2013). "2013 MTV Movie Awards winners list". Entertainment Weekly. Retrieved 15 April 2013.  ^ "PGA Motion Picture Nominees Announced". Producers Guild of America. 2 January 2013. Retrieved 4 January 2013.  ^ "Satellite Awards 2012". International Press Academy. 5 December 2012. Retrieved 5 December 2012.  ^ "39th Annual Saturn Awards" (PDF). Academy of Science Fiction, Fantasy & Horror Films. Archived from the original on 20 February 2013. Retrieved 20 February 2013.  ^ "The 2012 Screen Actors Guild Awards". DH. 12 December 2012. Retrieved 12 December 2012.  ^ "The 2012 WAFCA Awards". DC Film Critics. 9 December 2012. Retrieved 9 December 2012.  ^ "34th Annual Young Artist Awards". YoungArtistAwards.org. Retrieved 31 March 2013.  External links[edit] Wikiquote has quotations related to: Les Misérables (2012 film) Official website Les Misérables at the Internet Movie Database Les Misérables at the TCM Movie Database Les Misérables at Box Office Mojo Les Misérables at Rotten Tomatoes Les Misérables at Metacritic Les Misérables: information about the film and novel. v t e Works directed by Tom Hooper Theatrical films Red Dust (2004) The Damned United (2009) The King's Speech (2010) Les Misérables (2012) The Danish Girl (2015) Television Love in a Cold Climate (2001) Daniel Deronda (2002) Elizabeth I (2005) Longford (2006) John Adams (2008) v t e Works by William Nicholson Novels Wind On Fire Trilogy Noble Warriors Trilogy The Society of Others The Trial of True Love The Secret Intensity of Everyday Life Rich and Mad All The Hopeful Lovers Motherland Plays Shadowlands The Retreat from Moscow Films & TV written Shadowlands Nell (co-written with Mark Handley) First Knight Grey Owl Gladiator (co-written with John Logan and David Franzoni ;nominated of the Academy Award for Best Original Screenplay) Elizabeth: The Golden Age (co-written with Michael Hirst) Les Misérables Mandela: Long Walk to Freedom Unbroken (co-written with the Coen Brothers and Richard LaGravenese) Everest (co-written with Simon Beaufoy) Films directed Firelight v t e Les Misérables by Victor Hugo Characters Jean Valjean Javert Fantine Cosette Marius Éponine Enjolras Gavroche Thénardiers Bishop Myriel Patron-Minette Friends of the ABC Film adaptations 1909 1917 1925 1934 1935 1948 1952 1958 1978 1982 1995 1998 2012 Concerts 1995 2010 Other adaptations Musical Radio Les Misérables: Shōjo Cosette Jean Val Jean Television adaptations 1974 telenovela 2000 miniseries 2014 telenovela Songs and soundtracks Songs from Les Misérables "Do You Hear the People Sing?" "I Dreamed a Dream" "On My Own" "One Day More" "Suddenly" Les Misérables: Highlights from the Motion Picture Soundtrack v t e Golden Globe Award for Best Motion Picture – Musical or Comedy An American in Paris (1951) With a Song in My Heart (1952) Carmen Jones (1954) Guys and Dolls (1955) The King and I (1956) Les Girls (1957) Gigi / Auntie Mame (1958) Porgy and Bess / Some Like It Hot (1959) Song Without End / The Apartment (1960) West Side Story / A Majority of One (1961) The Music Man / That Touch of Mink (1962) Tom Jones (1963) My Fair Lady (1964) The Sound of Music (1965) The Russians Are Coming, the Russians Are Coming (1966) The Graduate (1967) Oliver! (1968) The Secret of Santa Vittoria (1969) MASH (1970) Fiddler on the Roof (1971) Cabaret (1972) American Graffiti (1973) The Longest Yard (1974) The Sunshine Boys (1975) A Star Is Born (1976) The Goodbye Girl (1977) Heaven Can Wait (1978) Breaking Away (1979) Coal Miner's Daughter (1980) Arthur (1981) Tootsie (1982) Yentl (1983) Romancing the Stone (1984) Prizzi's Honor (1985) Hannah and Her Sisters (1986) Hope and Glory (1987) Working Girl (1988) Driving Miss Daisy (1989) Green Card (1990) Beauty and the Beast (1991) The Player (1992) Mrs. Doubtfire (1993) The Lion King (1994) Babe (1995) Evita (1996) As Good as It Gets (1997) Shakespeare in Love (1998) Toy Story 2 (1999) Almost Famous (2000) Moulin Rouge! (2001) Chicago (2002) Lost in Translation (2003) Sideways (2004) Walk the Line (2005) Dreamgirls (2006) Sweeney Todd: The Demon Barber of Fleet Street (2007) Vicky Cristina Barcelona (2008) The Hangover (2009) The Kids Are All Right (2010) The Artist (2011) Les Misérables (2012) American Hustle (2013) The Grand Budapest Hotel (2014) The Martian (2015) v t e Satellite Award for Best Cast – Motion Picture 2004 Sideways Thomas Haden Church Paul Giamatti Virginia Madsen Sandra Oh 2005 Crash Chris Bridges Sandra Bullock Don Cheadle Matt Dillon Jennifer Esposito William Fichtner Brendan Fraser Terrence Howard Thandie Newton Ryan Phillippe Larenz Tate 2006 The Departed Anthony Anderson Alec Baldwin Matt Damon Leonardo DiCaprio Vera Farmiga Jack Nicholson Martin Sheen Mark Wahlberg Ray Winstone 2007 Before the Devil Knows You’re Dead Albert Finney Rosemary Harris Ethan Hawke Philip Seymour Hoffman Brían F. O’Byrne Amy Ryan Michael Shannon Marisa Tomei 2009 Nine Marion Cotillard Penélope Cruz Daniel Day-Lewis Judi Dench Fergie Kate Hudson Nicole Kidman Sophia Loren 2011 The Help Anna Camp Jessica Chastain Viola Davis Nelsan Ellis Aunjanue Ellis Bryce Dallas Howard Dana Ivey Allison Janney Leslie Jordan Brian Kerwin Chris Lowell Ahna O’Reilly David Oyelowo Sissy Spacek Octavia Spencer Mary Steenburgen Emma Stone Cicely Tyson Mike Vogel 2012 Les Miserábles Samantha Barks Sacha Baron Cohen Helena Bonham Carter Russell Crowe Anne Hathaway Hugh Jackman Eddie Redmayne Amanda Seyfried Aaron Tveit 2013 Nebraska Bruce Dern Missy Doty Will Forte Rance Howard Stacy Keach Angela McEwan Bob Odenkirk Devin Ratray Melinda Simonsen June Squibb Roger Stuckwisch Mary Louise Wilson 2014 Into the Woods Christine Baranski Tammy Blanchard Emily Blunt James Corden Lilla Crawford Frances de la Tour Johnny Depp Daniel Huttlestone Anna Kendrick Billy Magnussen MacKenzie Mauzy Chris Pine Lucy Punch Meryl Streep Tracey Ullman 2015 Spotlight Brian d’Arcy James Michael Keaton Rachel McAdams Mark Ruffalo Liev Schreiber John Slattery Stanley Tucci Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Les_Misérables_(2012_film)&oldid=717890410" Categories: 2012 films English-language films Films based on Les Misérables 2010s historical films 2010s musical films 2010s romantic drama films British films British epic films British historical films British musical films British romantic drama films Best Musical or Comedy Picture Golden Globe winners Films based on musicals Films featuring a Best Musical or Comedy Actor Golden Globe winning performance Films featuring a Best Supporting Actress Academy Award winning performance Films featuring a Best Supporting Actress Golden Globe-winning performance Films shot in England Films shot in France Films shot in London Films directed by Tom Hooper Films that won the Academy Award for Best Makeup Films that won the Best Sound Mixing Academy Award Musical drama films Romantic epic films IMAX films Relativity Media films Sung-through musical films Working Title Films films Universal Pictures films StudioCanal films Films produced by Eric Fellner Films produced by Tim Bevan Films based on adaptations Hidden categories: All pages needing factual verification Wikipedia articles needing factual verification from November 2012 Wikipedia articles needing factual verification from September 2012 Use dmy dates from August 2015 Use British English from January 2013 Articles with hCards Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Article Talk Variants Views Read Edit View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Featured content Current events Random article Donate to Wikipedia Wikipedia store Interaction Help About Wikipedia Community portal Recent changes Contact page Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Cite this page Print/export Create a book Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Languages العربية Azərbaycanca Български Català Čeština Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Հայերեն Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ქართული Қазақша Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Magyar مصرى Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Русский Simple English Slovenčina Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska ไทย Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links This page was last modified on 30 April 2016, at 09:58. Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view