Score: A Hockey Musical - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Score: A Hockey Musical From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to: navigation, search Score: A Hockey Musical Theatrical film poster Directed by Michael McGowan Produced by Jody Colero Avi Federgreen Richard Hanet Michael McGowan Nadia Tavazzani Screenplay by Michael McGowan Starring Noah Reid Olivia Newton-John Allie MacDonald Marc Jordan Nelly Furtado Music by Jonathan Goldsmith Cinematography Rudoloph Blahacek Edited by Roderick Deogrades Distributed by Mongrel Media Release dates September 9, 2010 (2010-09-09) (TIFF) October 22, 2010 (2010-10-22) (Canada) Running time 92 minutes Country Canada Language English Score: A Hockey Musical is a 2010 Canadian musical film, written and directed by Michael McGowan. Contents 1 Synopsis 2 Cast 3 Songs 4 Reception 5 Release 5.1 Home video 6 References 7 External links Synopsis[edit] Seventeen-year-old Farley Gordon has led a sheltered life, home-schooled and isolated by his parents. His closest friend is Eve, their next door neighbour. When his skill at hockey is realised, Farley is signed to a major hockey league and achieves instant fame and success. But pressure from his coach and teammates and a changing relationship with Eve begin to create intense strain in Farley's life.[1] Cast[edit] Noah Reid as Farley Gordon Allie MacDonald as Eve Stephen McHattie as Walt Acorn Olivia Newton-John as Hope Gordon Marc Jordan as Edgar Gordon Nelly Furtado as an ardent hockey fan John Pyper-Ferguson as Coach Donker John Robinson as Ace Dru Viergever as Moose Chris Ratz as Maurice George Stroumboulopoulos as an arena announcer Evan Solomon as himself Brandon Firla as Don Mohan Gianpaolo Venuta as Marco Steve Kouleas as himself Wesley Morgan as a sensitive player Marc Trottier as Jean Luc, the Braces goalie Paul O'Sullivan as a doctor Walter Gretzky as himself Theo Fleury as himself John McDermott as himself Hawksley Workman as Gump Thomas Mitchell as Darryl Songs[edit] The soundtrack to Score: A Hockey Musical contains 21 songs:[2] "O Hockey Canada" by The Canadian Children's Opera Company Written by Marco DiFelice, Jonathan Goldsmith, and Michael McGowan "Darryl vs. The Kid" Written by Barenaked Ladies and McGowan "Best Friends" Written by DiFelice, Emilie Mover, Benjamin Pinkerton, and McGowan "Frozen Toe" Written by DiFelice, Pinkerton, and McGowan "Hugs" by Olivia Newton-John Written by Olivia Newton-John, Amy Sky, and Marc Jordan "Give it a Shot" Written by DiFelice, Pinkerton, and McGowan "Buck 55" Written by DiFelice, Pinkerton, and McGowan "Kraft Dinner" Written by DiFelice, Pinkerton, and McGowan "Baboons" Written by DiFelice, Jody Colero, Alexander Andresen, and McGowan "Donker's Dilemma" Written by DiFelice, Pinkerton, and McGowan "Boyfriends" Written by DiFelice, Brent Barkman, Colero, and McGowan "Pacifism Defense" Written by DiFelice, Pinkerton, and McGowan "Ordinary Boy" Written by DiFelice, Ryan Corrigan, and McGowan "Boy in the Bubble" Written by DiFelice, Corrigan, and McGowan "Dead and Done" Written by DiFelice, Corrigan, and McGowan "Toe to Toe" Written by DiFelice, Corrigan, and McGowan "Legends" Written by DiFelice, Benjamin, Pinkerton, Jordan, and McGowan "Eve's a Goddess" Written by DiFelice, Corrigan, Amy Sky, and McGowan "Hockey; The Greatest Game in the Land (Movie Version)" Written by DiFelice, Pinkerton, Colero, and McGowan "Time Stand Still" by Nelly Furtado Written by Geddy Lee, Alex Lifeson, and Neil Peart "Hockey; The Greatest Game in the Land (Radio Edit)" by Hawksley Workman Written by Colero, McGowan, DeFelice, Pinkerton, and Hawksley Norman Reception[edit] Peter Howell of the Toronto Star gave it two and-a-half stars out of four saying: "Score isn’t deep and there’s no danger of it becoming a global phenomenon. But it’s as true a crowd-pleaser, one that doesn't require season tickets to the Maple Leafs to appreciate."[3] Stephen Cole of the Globe and Mail gave it three stars out of four, praising McGowan's direction of the film's genre saying: "McGowan's (Saint Ralph) wondrous achievement here is making a discarded genre seem like ready-made fun. He does so by creating a playful satire of musicals, while somehow - this is the hard part - capturing the charm that made song and dance movies so popular."[4] Other reviews were less positive. Greig Dymond of CBC said the film is "marred by weak lyrics, even weaker melodies and a number of actors who probably shouldn’t be singing in public."[5] Will Sloan of Exclaim! said the film "fails resoundingly on every level" and "that it was selected to open the Toronto International Film Festival is embarrassing."[6] Release[edit] The film premiered at the Toronto International Film Festival on September 9, 2010 as part of its Opening Night Gala. It was released in theatres in Canada on October 22.[7] Home video[edit] The DVD was released on January 18, 2011.[8] References[edit] ^ Score: A Hockey Musical | Synopsis ^ Score: A Hockey Musical | Music ^ Peter Howell (October 22, 2010). "Score: A Hockey Musical: The perils of losing your (Don) Cherry". Toronto Star. Retrieved October 24, 2010.  ^ Stephen Cole (October 22, 2010). "Score: A Hockey Musical: It's love on skates". The Globe and Mail. Retrieved October 29, 2010.  ^ Greig Dymond (October 21, 2010). "Review: Score: A Hockey Musical". CBC. Retrieved September 23, 2014.  ^ Will Sloan (October 2010). "Score: A Hockey Musical". Exclaim!. Retrieved September 23, 2014.  ^ "Score: A Hockey Musical". Tribute.ca.  ^ "Score". Amazon.ca.  External links[edit] Score: A Hockey Musical at AllMovie Score: A Hockey Musical at the Internet Movie Database Score: A Hockey Musical at Rotten Tomatoes v t e Films directed by Michael McGowan My Dog Vincent (1998) Saint Ralph (2004) One Week (2008) Vacation with Derek (2010) Score: A Hockey Musical (2010) Still Mine (2012) Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Score:_A_Hockey_Musical&oldid=684909203" Categories: 2010 films English-language films Canadian films 2010s musical films Canadian comedy films Films directed by Michael McGowan Films set in Toronto Films shot in Toronto Ice hockey films Musical comedy films Sports comedy films Canadian musical films Canadian sports films Hidden categories: Pages using infobox film with unknown parameters Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Article Talk Variants Views Read Edit View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Featured content Current events Random article Donate to Wikipedia Wikipedia store Interaction Help About Wikipedia Community portal Recent changes Contact page Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Cite this page Print/export Create a book Download as PDF Printable version Languages Add links This page was last modified on 9 October 2015, at 14:59. Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view