Municipal government of Toronto - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Municipal government of Toronto From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to: navigation, search This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (February 2013) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) Logo of The City of Toronto The municipal government of Toronto is a public corporation providing services to Toronto, Ontario, Canada. It is administered by 44 elected councillors (representing around 55,000 people each), who along with the mayor, make up the Toronto City Council. Torontonians elect a new council every four years, in October. Contents 1 Administration 2 Finances 3 History 4 Divisions 4.1 Corporations 4.2 Bodies 5 References 6 External links Administration[edit] Part of the series on Politics of Toronto Politics Mayor of Toronto Toronto City Council Municipal government Elections Other Toronto City Hall Toronto portal v t e The City of Toronto is legally bound by the City of Toronto Act, an Ontario law. It lays down the division of powers, responsibilities and required duties of the corporation. The City Council is the only power able to enact Toronto laws, known as "by-laws", which govern the actions of the corporation and/or matters within its jurisdiction, such as administration of the Canadian Criminal Code within its borders. The Council itself forms several committees after every election to divide the administration of the corporation. The Council also forms several "Community Councils" which hear matters relating to narrower, district issues, such as building permits and developments requiring changes to zoning by-laws. Community Council decisions, as well as those of the Mayor, must be approved by City Council at regular sessions. The top civil servant in the corporation is the City Manager, who reports to the Mayor and City Council. Prior to 2005, the city had various departments headed by Commissioners. These heads were simplified by replacing the departments with divisions headed by Deputy Manager. All department heads now report to the City Manager (from 2002-2014 Joseph Pennachetti[1]). The following senior staff report to the City Manager: Five Directors three Deputy City Managers (including one as Chief Financial Officer) 22 Directors (including Executive Directors, Acting ED, Project Directors) 11 Managers (including General Managers, Acting General Managers) one Treasurer three Officers (Chief Information Officer, Chief Corporate Officer, Medical Officer of Health) City officials reporting directly to City Council: Auditor General Integrity Commissioner Lobbyists Registrar Ombudsman City Solicitor City Clerk Finances[edit] The City of Toronto represents the fifth largest municipal government in North America, and has an operating budget of $7.8 billion. The most recent operating budget was composed of $2.5 billion of funds from the Government of Ontario for purposes they mandate such as Toronto Public Health, $2.0 billion for special purpose bodies including the Toronto Public Library and Toronto Zoo, $1.7 billion of directly controlled money, and $900 million for capital financing and other programs.[2] The city's net debt stood at $4.4 billion as of the end of 2010 and has an AA credit rating from Standard & Poor's, and an Aa1 credit rating from Moody's.[3][4][5] Toronto is expected to pay $400 million of the debt in 2011.[3] The city's debt increased by $721 million in 2010.[3] History[edit] This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (July 2015) Main article: History of Toronto The City of Toronto was incorporated in 1834, succeeding York, which was administered directly by the then-province of Upper Canada. The new city was administered by an elected council, which served a one-year term. The first mayor, chosen by the elected councillors, was William Lyon Mackenzie. The first law passed was "an Act for the preventing & extinguishing of Fires".[6] The first mayor directly elected to the post was Adam Wilson, elected in 1859. Through 1955 the term of office for the mayor and council was one year; it then varied between two and three years until a four-year term was adopted starting in 2006. (See List of Toronto municipal elections.) To finance operations, the municipality levied property taxes. In 1850, Toronto also started levying income taxes.[7] Toronto levied personal income taxes until 1936, and corporate income taxes until 1944.[8] Until 1914, Toronto grew by annexing neighbouring municipalities such as Parkdale and Seaton Village. After 1914, Toronto stopped annexing bordering municipalities, although some municipalities overwhelmed by growth requested it. After World War II, an extensive group of suburban villages and townships surrounded Toronto. Change to the legal structure came in 1954, with the creation of the Municipality of Metropolitan Toronto (known more popularly as "Metro") in 1954. This new regional government, which encompassed Toronto and the smaller communities of East York, Etobicoke, Forest Hill, Leaside, Long Branch, Mimico, New Toronto, North York, Scarborough, Swansea, Weston and York, was created by the Government of Ontario to support suburban growth. This new municipality could borrow money on its own for capital projects and it received taxes from all municipalities including Toronto, which meant that the Toronto tax base was now available to support the suburban growth. The new regional government built highways, water systems and public transit, while the thirteen townships, villages, towns, and cities continued to provide some local services to their residents. To manage the yearly upkeep of the new infrastructure, the new regional government levied its own property tax, collected by the local municipalities. On January 1, 1967, several of the smaller municipalities were amalgamated with larger ones, reducing their number to six. Forest Hill and Swansea became part of Toronto; Long Branch, Mimico, and New Toronto joined Etobicoke; Weston merged with York; and Leaside amalgamated with East York. This arrangement lasted until 1998, when the regional level of government was abolished and Etobicoke, North York, East York, York, and Scarborough were amalgamated into Toronto the "megacity". Mel Lastman, the long-time mayor of North York before the amalgamation, was the first mayor (62nd overall) of the new "megacity" of Toronto, which is the successor of the previous City of Toronto. Existing by-laws of the individual municipalities were retained until such time that new city-wide by-laws could be written and enacted. New city-wide by-laws have been enacted, although many of the individual differences were continued, applying only to the districts where the by-laws applied, such as winter sidewalk clearing, and garbage pickup. The existing city halls of the various municipalities were retained by the new corporation. The City of York's civic centre became a court office. The existing 1965 City Hall of Toronto became the city hall of the new megacity, while the "city hall" of the Metro government is used as municipal office space. Divisions[edit] Toronto Support Services Division Toronto Solid Waste Management Toronto Water Toronto Technical Services Division Toronto Transportation Services Division Toronto Homes for the Aged Division Toronto Children's Services Division Toronto Employment and Social Services Division Toronto Parks, Forestry and Recreation Division Toronto Shelter, Support & Housing Administration Division Toronto Economic Development and Culture Division Toronto Public Library Emergency Services Division Toronto Hydro Toronto Police Service Toronto EMS Toronto Fire Services Toronto (CAN-TF3) Heavy Urban Search and Rescue - unit with the emergency services (police, fire, EMS) Accounting Services Affordable Housing Office Pension, Payroll & Employee Benefits Policy, Planning, Finance & Administration City Clerk's Office Toronto Public Health City Planning Purchasing & Materials Management Corporate Finance Revenue Services Court Services Social Development Employment & Social Services Facilities & Real Estate Finance & Administration Special Events Financial Planning Special Projects Strategic Communications Fleet Services Human Resources Toronto Building Human Rights Office Toronto Environment Office Information & Technology Toronto Office of Partnerships Legal Services Licensing & Standards Waterfront Secretariat Corporations[edit] Toronto Community Housing Toronto Parking Authority Bodies[edit] Toronto District School Board References[edit] ^ "Overview - City Manager's Office". Toronto. Retrieved 7 July 2014.  ^ Corporate and Human Resources (7 March 2005). "Toronto Fact Sheet – 2005 Operating Budget – Where the Money Goes" (PDF). Retrieved 2014-06-09.  ^ a b c Moloney, Paul (June 27, 2011). "Toronto debt $4.4B and rising". Toronto Star. Retrieved August 12, 2011.  ^ "Toronto (City of)". Standard & Poor's Ratings Services. McGraw Hill Financial. Retrieved 21 June 2015.  ^ Heitmann, Kathrin. "Toronto, City of". Moody's. Retrieved 21 June 2015.  ^ "Toronto in 1834". City of Toronto. Retrieved October 2, 2015.  ^ An Act to establish a more equal and just system of Assessment in the several Townships, Villages, Towns and Cities in Upper Canada, S.Prov.C. 1850, c. 67, s. 4 ^ John Sewell (April 2011). "Letter". The Walrus. Retrieved 2013-03-18.  External links[edit] Government of Toronto website Toronto municipal budget, 2006 website v t e Government and politics of Toronto Mayor City Council Toronto Public Library Toronto District School Board Toronto EMS Toronto Fire Services Toronto Community Housing Toronto (CAN-TF3) Heavy Urban Search and Rescue Toronto Police Service (Board) Toronto Support Services Division Toronto Technical Services Division Toronto Water Toronto Shelter, Support & Housing Administration Division Toronto Children's Services Division Toronto Parks, Forestry and Recreation Division Toronto Transit Commission Toronto Economic Development and Culture Division Toronto Homes for the Aged Division Toronto Employment and Social Services Division Toronto Works and Emergency Services v t e  Toronto Features General outline Demographics Name Flag Coat of arms Sister cities Notable Torontonians History Toronto Carrying-Place Trail Fort Rouillé Fort York Toronto Purchase York Battle of York Battle of Montgomery's Tavern Great Fire of 1849 Great Fire of 1904 Centennial of the City Metro Toronto Hurricane Hazel effects Amalgamation of Toronto Oldest buildings National Historic Sites Timeline Former municipalities Geography Greater Toronto Area Golden Horseshoe Neighbourhoods History Demographics Official list Downtown Parks Waterfront Harbour Don River Humber River Rouge River Toronto Islands Leslie Street Spit Scarborough Bluffs Ravine system Native trees Fauna Economy Bay Street Financial District Toronto Stock Exchange Toronto Region Board of Trade Skyscrapers Politics Municipal government Elections City of Toronto Act Mayors City Council City Hall Toronto Government and Public Services Crime Public services Paramedic Services Fire Health and Toronto Public Health Hospitals Parks, Forestry and Recreation Recreation Centres Police Shelter and Housing Solid Waste Management Water Works and Emergency Services Education Primary/Secondary Toronto District School Board Catholic District School Board Conseil scolaire Viamonde Conseil scolaire de district catholique Centre-Sud Libraries Toronto Public Library Toronto Tool Library Post Secondary Collège Boréal Centennial College George Brown College Humber College OCAD University Ryerson University Seneca College Tyndale University College and Seminary University of Guelph-Humber University of Toronto York University Culture Attractions Landmarks Tourism Architecture Cinemas Media outlets Cuisine Sports Sports teams Amateur sports Labour Day Classic Shopping malls Annual events Films set in Toronto Films shot in Toronto Hollywood North Let's All Hate Toronto Places of worship Churches in Toronto Synagogues in Toronto Transportation Public Transportation TTC GO Transit Metrolinx Union Pearson Express Other Transportation Services Toronto Transportation Services PortsToronto Parking Authority Airports Island Ferry Roads North–South East–West Bridges Bike Share Cycling Category Portal WikiProject v t e Government and politics of the former Metropolitan Toronto Chairs Council Community Services Emergency Medical Services Metro Hall Homes for the Aged Hostel Services Parks and Culture Police Service and Board Roads and Transportation Transit Commission Works Zoo Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Municipal_government_of_Toronto&oldid=712765390" Categories: Municipal government of Toronto 1998 establishments in Ontario Hidden categories: Articles needing additional references from February 2013 All articles needing additional references Articles needing additional references from July 2015 Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Article Talk Variants Views Read Edit View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Featured content Current events Random article Donate to Wikipedia Wikipedia store Interaction Help About Wikipedia Community portal Recent changes Contact page Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Cite this page Print/export Create a book Download as PDF Printable version Languages Add links This page was last modified on 31 March 2016, at 00:33. Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view