Flag of Ontario - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Flag of Ontario From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to: navigation, search Ontario Proportion 1:2 Adopted May 21, 1965 Design A Red Ensign with the shield of the Coat of arms of Ontario in the field The flag of Ontario was enacted by the Flag Act on May 21, 1965 in the Legislature of the Province of Ontario.[1] The flag is a defaced Red Ensign, with the United Kingdom's Union Flag in the canton and the Ontario shield of arms in the fly. Before 1965, the Canadian Red Ensign had served as the national flag of Canada. It was flown at all military installations in Canada and overseas, outside the legislature and government buildings, at Royal Canadian Legion halls, and many private homes. In 1964, the federal government, after a long and acrimonious debate, replaced the Red Ensign with the current flag of Canada. This decision was unpopular among millions of Canadians. These included many Ontarians, particularly in rural areas that made up much of the political base of Premier John Robarts' Ontario Progressive Conservatives. Robarts thus proposed that Ontario would have its own flag and that it would be a Red Ensign like the previous Canadian flag. It was traditional for jurisdictions around the world with a British system of government and way of life to adapt either a blue or red ensign as a flag, by adding the local coat of arms or some other symbol. In Ontario, it was logical to place the Ontario shield of arms on the flag. While Robarts insisted that he supported the new national flag, he felt the Ensign was an important symbol that reflected Ontario's British heritage and the sacrifices made by Canadian troops under the Red Ensign. As Robarts put it, the Ontario flag "covers our history." Canadians were exhausted by the long debate over the national flag and leaders of both the Ontario Liberal Party and the Ontario New Democratic Party decided to support the design for the proposed Ontario flag. The only opposition came from Sudbury Liberal Member of Provincial Parliament Elmer Sopha who was fervently opposed to the flag, arguing that it failed to reflect Ontario's diverse character and that it was "a flag of revenge" against the new national flag. However, he was only joined by one other MPP, Liberal Leo Troy, in voting against the flag, and it was passed by the Legislative Assembly on March 17. The flag of Manitoba was adopted under similar circumstances. In 2001, a survey conducted by the North American Vexillological Association (NAVA) placed the Ontario provincial flag 43rd in design quality out of the 72 Canadian provincial, U.S. state, and U.S. territory flags ranked.[2] Standard of the Lieutenant Governor of Ontario Standard of the Lieutenant Governor of Ontario (1959-1965) Flag of Franco-Ontarians Ontario Flag Day[edit] On May 13, 2015, the liberal MPP from Etobicoke Centre Yvan Baker put forward the Ontario Flag Day Act, 2015. This bill, which passed the house and received royal assent on June 4 in the same year, declares May 21 every year as Ontario Flag Day. References[edit] ^ "Emblems and Symbols". Government of Ontario. Retrieved 2007-10-02.  ^ "2001 State/Provincial Flag Survey". North American Vexillological Association. 10 June 2001. Retrieved 11 March 2014.  External links[edit] Ontario Flag Act Government of Ontario, About Ontario: Emblems and Symbols Flags of Canada - Ontario book chapter by Alistair B. Fraser Rebellion of 1837-1839 in Upper Canada flags of Upper Canada from Flags of the World Wikimedia Commons has media related to Flag of Ontario. v t e Canadian flags National Royal Standard Prince of Wales Duke of Cambridge Governor General Canada Red Ensign Provinces and territories Lieutenant Governors Alberta British Columbia Manitoba New Brunswick Newfoundland and Labrador Northwest Territories Nova Scotia Nunavut Ontario Prince Edward Island Quebec Saskatchewan Yukon Cities Calgary Edmonton Hamilton Montreal Ottawa Quebec City Toronto Vancouver Victoria Winnipeg Windsor more v t e Topics on Ontario History Fur trade Heritage sites History Politics Political parties Elections Government Lieutenant Governor Cabinet Premiers (current) Legislature Monarchy Leader of the Opposition Geography Demographics Mountains Natural history Protected areas Rivers Communities Census divisions Municipalities Cities Towns Villages Designated places Settlements Economy Companies Highways Airports Culture Education First Nations Law Music Sports People Symbols Flag Coat of arms Universities Colleges Category:Ontario Portal:Ontario WikiProject:Ontario v t e National and regional flags incorporating the Union Jack Sovereign states Australia Fiji New Zealand Tuvalu United Kingdom Dependent territories United Kingdom Anguilla Ascension Island Bermuda British Antarctic Territory British Indian Ocean Territory British Virgin Islands Cayman Islands Falkland Islands Montserrat Pitcairn Islands Saint Helena South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands Tristan da Cunha Turks and Caicos Islands New Zealand Cook Islands Niue States, provinces and other administrative divisions Australia New South Wales Queensland South Australia Tasmania Victoria Western Australia Lord Howe Island Canada British Columbia Manitoba Ontario United States Hawaii Cities Chile Coquimbo United States Baton Rouge, Louisiana Taunton, Massachusetts Miscellaneous Flags based on British ensigns List of British flags Heraldry portal Ontario portal Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Flag_of_Ontario&oldid=711286807" Categories: Flags of Ontario 1965 establishments in Ontario Provincial symbols of Ontario Flags of Canada Red Ensigns Hidden categories: Commons category with local link same as on Wikidata Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Article Talk Variants Views Read Edit View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Featured content Current events Random article Donate to Wikipedia Wikipedia store Interaction Help About Wikipedia Community portal Recent changes Contact page Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Cite this page Print/export Create a book Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Languages العربية Català Cymraeg Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto فارسی Français 한국어 Italiano עברית Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Português Русский Српски / srpski Українська 中文 Edit links This page was last modified on 21 March 2016, at 23:53. Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view