Red Ensign (film) - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Red Ensign (film) From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to: navigation, search Red Ensign Red Ensign video cover: Barr confronts Manning's rabble-rouser Directed by Michael Powell Produced by Jerome Jackson[1] Written by Jerome Jackson L. du Garde Peach Michael Powell Starring Leslie Banks Carol Goodner Frank Vosper Alfred Drayton Donald Calthrop Cinematography Leslie Rowson Edited by Geoffrey Barkas Distributed by Gaumont British Picture Corporation Ltd Release dates June 1934 (1934-06) (UK) Running time 66 minutes Country United Kingdom Language English Budget £12,000 (estimated) Red Ensign (1934) is an early low-budget "quota quickie"[2] by noted British filmmaker Michael Powell. Contents 1 Plot 2 Production 3 Analysis 4 Cast 5 DVD 6 References 7 External links Plot[edit] In 1933, David Barr is the manager and chief designer of Glasgow shipbuilding firm Burns, McKinnon & Co. He comes up with a radical new ship design that can carry 25% more cargo for the tonnage and use less fuel at a time when the industry as a whole is in recession. Barr decides to build not just one ship, as Lord Dean advises, but twenty (to bring the costs down to a manageable level). Manning, a rival shipbuilder Barr loathes, hears rumors and sends two men undercover to find out what they can. They manage to get themselves hired. Manning then offers to purchase either the design or all the ships they can build. Both offers are rejected. With the support of June McKinnon, the chief shareholder, Barr proceeds, despite the opposition of Lord Dean and other members of the board. He receives a severe setback when the Government declines to give him a contract or pass a shipping bill, and is driven to use his own money to try to complete the ship. When he runs out and cannot secure a loan to cover the payroll, a rabble-rouser tries to stir up the men, but Barr convinces them to stick by him. June, having heard his rousing speech, offers to let him obtain a loan on the security of her trust fund. Manning's men knock out the night watchman and blow up the ship being built; a man named MacLeod is killed. Bassett, a reporter, informs Barr that MacLeod was third officer on one of Manning's ships. Now needing funds desperately, Barr forges Lord Dean's signature to obtain a loan when Dean, as a trustee of June's trust, refuses to cooperate (partly out of jealousy of Barr and June's developing relationship). Manning finds out and tries to blackmail Barr into selling the design, but Barr refuses to do so and is convicted of forgery. Later, however, Manning is sought for manslaughter, while Barr is present when June launches the first of the new ships, the SS David Barr. Production[edit] This was Powell's 12th film in four years, and perhaps his most memorable one in that period.[citation needed] "It was the first time that Michael Powell himself realised that there was something special about a Michael Powell film, something going on on the screen, or behind the screen, which you couldn't put your finger on, something intriguing, aloof, but in the long run memorable."[3] Analysis[edit] The character of David Barr is seen as an early precursor of Powell's own alter-ego in Michael Powell films such as Eric Portman's Colpeper in A Canterbury Tale (1944) and Roger Livesey's Dr Reeves in A Matter of Life and Death (1946). Indeed the whole film is seen as a parallel with the struggles of a young bold film director, and a plea for a strong British film industry. The strong crusading tone of the film prefigures Powell's wartime propaganda films such as 49th Parallel and Contraband. A minor character is pointedly called 'Grierson' after the celebrated documentary maker John Grierson. This character is described as 'the best rivetter in the yard' who 'taught me [Barr] everything I know'. This scene is immediately followed with one of Barr firing a 'militant' worker intent on provoking industrial strife in the yard. Cast[edit] Leslie Banks as David Barr Carol Goodner as June MacKinnon Frank Vosper as Lord Dean Alfred Drayton as Manning Campbell Gullan as Hannay, a shipyard worker Percy Parsons as Casey, one of Manning's undercover troublemakers Fewlass Llewellyn as Sir Gregory, a member of the company's board Henry Oscar as Raglan, a member of the board Allan Jeayes as Grierson Donald Calthrop as MacLeod, another of Manning's saboteurs Henry Caine as Bassett George Carney as Mr. Lindsey, a publican (uncredited) Jack Lambert as Police Inspector (uncredited) John Laurie as Wages Accountant (uncredited) Frederick Piper as Mr. McWilliams (uncredited) Jack Raine as Testing Official (uncredited) DVD[edit] The film has been released on Region 1 DVD by MPI along with The Phantom Light (1934) and The Upturned Glass (1947). The film has been released on Region 2 DVD by Opening in the "Les films de ma vie" series. The DVD has fixed French subtitles for the original English soundtrack. References[edit] ^ Mark Duguid. "Red Ensign (1934)". BFI Screenonline. Retrieved 1 March 2016.  ^ Dave Kehr. "Early British Cinema". The New York Times.  ^ Powell, Michael (1986). A Life in Movies. London: Heinemann. ISBN 0-434-59945-X.  External links[edit] Red Ensign at the Internet Movie Database Red Ensign at AllMovie Red Ensign reviews and articles at the Powell & Pressburger Pages Red Ensign at the British Film Institute's Screenonline. Full synopsis and film stills (and clips viewable from UK libraries). v t e Powell and Pressburger Michael Powell Emeric Pressburger The Spy in Black Contraband 49th Parallel One of Our Aircraft is Missing The Life and Death of Colonel Blimp The Volunteer A Canterbury Tale I Know Where I'm Going! A Matter of Life and Death Black Narcissus The Red Shoes The Small Back Room The Elusive Pimpernel Gone to Earth The Tales of Hoffmann Oh... Rosalinda!! The Battle of the River Plate Ill Met by Moonlight They're a Weird Mob The Boy Who Turned Yellow Powell only Two Crowded Hours My Friend the King The Rasp Rynox The Star Reporter Hotel Splendide C.O.D. His Lordship Born Lucky The Fire Raisers Red Ensign Something Always Happens The Girl in the Crowd Lazybones The Love Test The Night of the Party The Phantom Light The Price of a Song Someday Her Last Affaire The Brown Wallet Crown v. Stevens The Man Behind the Mask The Edge of the World Smith The Lion Has Wings The Thief of Bagdad An Airman's Letter to His Mother The Sorcerer's Apprentice Luna de Miel Peeping Tom The Queen's Guards Herzog Blaubarts Burg Age of Consent Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Red_Ensign_(film)&oldid=712785994" Categories: 1934 films English-language films British films British black-and-white films Films by Powell and Pressburger Films directed by Michael Powell Films set in 1933 Films set in Glasgow Quota quickies Hidden categories: Use dmy dates from March 2016 Use British English from March 2016 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from January 2016 Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Article Talk Variants Views Read Edit View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Featured content Current events Random article Donate to Wikipedia Wikipedia store Interaction Help About Wikipedia Community portal Recent changes Contact page Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Cite this page Print/export Create a book Download as PDF Printable version Languages Français Nederlands Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Edit links This page was last modified on 31 March 2016, at 03:31. Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view