Lloyd's List - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Lloyd's List From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to: navigation, search Not to be confused with Lloyds Bank, Lloyd's of London, or Lloyd's Register. Lloyd's List is one of the world's oldest continuously running journals, having provided weekly shipping news in London as early as 1734. It was published daily until 2013 (when issue 60,850 was published), and in constantly updated digital format only since then. Known simply as 'The List', it was begun by the proprietor of Lloyd's Coffee House in the City of London, England as a reliable and concise source of information for the merchants' agents and insurance underwriters who met regularly in his establishment in Lombard Street to negotiate insurance coverage for trading vessels.[1] The digital version, updated hour-to-hour,[2] and used internationally, continues to fulfil a similar purpose. Lloyd's today covers all information, analysis, and knowledge relevant to the shipping industry, including marine insurance, offshore energy, logistics, market data, research, global trade and law, in addition to shipping news.[3] Contents 1 History 2 Notes and references 3 Further reading 4 External links History[edit] Predecessor publications are known. One historian, Michael Palmer wrote that "No later than January 1692, Lloyd began publishing a weekly newsletter, ‘Ships Arrived at and Departed from several Ports of England, as I have Account of them in London... [and] An Account of what English Shipping and Foreign Ships for England, I hear of in Foreign Ports’".[4] However, claims that Lloyd's List is the oldest or second-oldest continuously published newspaper in the world are disputed. The World Association of Newspapers lists three earlier, extant titles.[5] Research on the history of Edward Lloyd, the founder of the coffee house, was carried out by Charles Wright and C. Ernest Fayle, authors of 'A History of Lloyd's', published in 1928[6] and cited by classification society Lloyd’s Register.[7] The coffee house is first mentioned in 1689 in the London Gazette, when it was based in Tower Street. In 1691, Lloyd moved the premises to Lombard Street, close to the Royal Exchange at the heart of London’s trading activity. It became popular with merchants involved with the shipping industry, attracting a crowd that came regularly for news and gossip that Lloyd collected for clients. Lloyd’s News was published three times a week with no particular emphasis on shipping from 1696 to 1697. However, news continued to be read aloud at the coffee house. In 1713 Edward Lloyd died, leaving the lease of his coffee house to his son-in-law and head waiter William Newton. Newton died the following year, and Lloyd’s daughter Handy remarried to Samuel Sheppard. She died in 1720, leaving no Lloyd family member connected to the coffee house. Sheppard died in 1727, leaving it to his sister Elizabeth and her husband Thomas Jemson. Jemson founded the Lloyd’s List that is known today, when he launched a weekly shipping intelligence publication. Publication was weekly until March 1735, then twice weekly, on Tuesdays and Fridays, according to historian Michael Palmer. By the 1760s the coffee house was reported to have acquired a bad reputation. One of the waiters secured new premises in Pope's Head Alley and from there in 1769, the New Lloyd’s List began, according to Lloyd's Register. The paper was published every day but Sunday from 1 July 1837. In July 1884 Lloyd's List merged with the Shipping and Mercantile Gazette. Over the years, Lloyd's List spawned several spin-off titles, including sister title Insurance Day, still owned by Informa plc. In 2009 Lloyd's List went through a major re-design that encompassed both the masthead and the newspaper itself. In 2011 the Lloyd’s List App was launched in the Apple iTunes store. In 2012 Containerisation International was included on Lloyd's List. Lloyd's List was published in digital format only from 20 December 2013, as it was found that fewer than 2% of customers used only the print version.[8] Notes and references[edit] ^ John J. McCusker, "The Early History of ‘Lloyd's List’." ^ "Lloyd's List - About Us". lloydslist.com. Retrieved 7 May 2016.  ^ Lloyd's List - Web site ^ Lloyd's List, UK: Mariners-L . ^ Oldest newspapers still in circulation, WAN Press . ^ Charles Wright; Charles Ernest Fayle (1928). A History of Lloyd's: From the Founding of Lloyd's Coffee House to the Present Day. Published for the Corporation of Lloyd's by Macmillan and Company limited.  ^ "Lloyd's Register information sheet 16: Edward Lloyd and his coffee house". Lloyd's Register. Retrieved 7 May 2016.  ^ "Lloyd's List set to become a totally digital service on 20 December 2013". - Lloyd's List. 25 September 2013. Retrieved 7 May 2016.  Further reading[edit] Cameron, Alan, and Roy Farndon. Scenes from sea and city: Lloyd's list 1734-1984 (Lloyd's List, 1984), 250th. special anniversary supplement. McCusker, John J. "The Early History of ‘Lloyd's List’." Historical Research 64#155 (1991): 427-431. External links[edit] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Lloyd's List. Lloyd's List Michael Palmer's Lloyd's List history page Lloyd's List digitised by Google v t e Informa plc Taylor & Francis Ashgate Publishing CRC Press Focal Press Garland Science Psychology Press Routledge Journals Informa Healthcare Scrip World Pharmaceutical News Informa Business Information Informa Maritime Lloyd's MIU Lloyd's List Lloyd's List Intelligence Lloyd's Maritime Academy Washington Policy & Analysis Informa Professional Lloyd's Law Reports Trademark World Patent World Banking Technology Insurance Day CPDcast Informa Cargo Information International Freighting Weekly Containerisation International Agra Informa F.O.Licht The Public Ledger Other BioTechniques Datamonitor Informa Financial Information Informa Research Services Informa Investment Solutions Informa Global Markets International Insider Informa Australia Publishing Lloyd's List Australia Australian Journal of Mining Australian Bulk Handling Review Earthmover & Civil Contractor Rail Express Conferences & Exhibitions IIR Australia Australian Exhibitions and Conferences International Mining & Metals Lloyd's List Australia Events AJM Events Training IIR Executive Development Informa Telecoms & Media Mobile Communications International Informa Yacht Group Monaco Yacht Show Superyacht Cup Informa Canada Fan Expo Canada Dallas Comic Con MegaCon Conferences Adam Smith Conferences Euroforum IBC ICBI IIR Informa Exhibitions Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Lloyd%27s_List&oldid=719094888" Categories: English magazines Water transport in England Newspapers published in London Publications established in 1734 1734 establishments in England Insurance Hidden categories: Use dmy dates from October 2013 Use British English from October 2013 Commons category with local link same as on Wikidata Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Article Talk Variants Views Read Edit View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Featured content Current events Random article Donate to Wikipedia Wikipedia store Interaction Help About Wikipedia Community portal Recent changes Contact page Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Cite this page Print/export Create a book Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Languages Deutsch Français Italiano Nederlands Polski Português Suomi 中文 Edit links This page was last modified on 7 May 2016, at 15:42. Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view