Motto - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Motto From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to: navigation, search For the song by Drake, see The Motto. For other uses, see Motto (disambiguation). Part of a series on Heraldic achievement Conventional elements of coats of arms Escutcheon Chief Field (Tincture) Division Supporter Supporter Motto (alternative) Crest Torse Mantling Helmet Crown/Coronet Compartment Order Ordinaries Charges Motto Dexter Sinister (right) (left) v t e A motto (derived from the Latin muttum, 'mutter', by way of Italian motto, 'word', 'sentence')[1][2][3] is a maxim, a phrase meant to formally summarize the general motivation or intention of an individual, family, social group or organization.[2][3] Mottos are usually not expressed verbally, unlike slogans, but are expressed in writing and usually stem from long traditions of social foundations, or also from significant events, such as a civil war or a revolution. A motto may be in any language, but Latin has been widely used, especially in the Western world. Contents 1 Heraldry 2 Literature 3 See also 4 References Heraldry[edit] In heraldry, a motto is often depicted below the shield in a banderole; this placement stems from the Middle Ages, in which the vast majority of nobles possessed a coat of arms and a motto. In the case of Scottish heraldry it is mandated to appear above the crest.[4] Spanish coats of arms may display a motto in the bordure of the shield.[5] In heraldic literature, the terms "rallying cry" respectively "battle banner" are also common, which date back to the battle cry, and is usually located above the coat of arms. In English heraldry mottos are not granted with armorial bearings, and may be adopted and changed at will. In Scottish heraldry, mottos can only be changed by re-matriculation, with the Lord Lyon King of Arms.[6] Although very unusual and perhaps outside standard heraldic practice, there are some examples of the particular appearance of the motto scroll and letters thereon being blazoned.[7] Ships and submarines in the Royal Navy each have a badge and motto, as do units of the Royal Air Force.[8] Latin has been very common for mottos, but for nation states their official language is generally chosen. Examples of unusual choices in motto language include: County of Somerset, Sumorsaete ealle (All men of Somerset), Anglo-Saxon;[9][10] South Cambridgeshire in the English Fens, Niet Zonder Arbyt (Not Without Labour), Dutch:[11][12] South Africa, ǃke e: ǀxarra ǁke (Unity in diversity), ǀXam. A canting motto is one that contains word play.[13] For example, the motto of the Earl of Onslow is Festina lente, punningly interpreting on-slow (literally "make haste slowly").[14] Literature[edit] In literature, a motto is a sentence, phrase, poem, or word prefixed to an essay, chapter, novel, or the like suggestive of its subject matter. It is a short, suggestive expression of a guiding principle for the written material that follows.[3] For example, Robert Louis Stevenson's Travels with a Donkey in the Cévennes uses mottos at the start of each section.[15] See also[edit] Epigram Hendiatris Inscription List of Latin phrases List of mottos List of national mottos Slogan Tagline United in diversity United we stand, divided we fall References[edit] ^ "Motto". Merriam-Webster. Retrieved 31 January 2011.  ^ a b "Motto". Oxford University Press. Retrieved 31 January 2011.  ^ a b c "Webster's Revised Unabridged Dictionary (1913)". The ARTFL Project. The University of Chicago. Retrieved 20 December 2013.  ^ Von Volborth, Carl-Alexander (March 1980). Heraldry of the World. Blandford Pr. p. 192.  ^ Von Volborth, Carl-Alexander (March 1980). Heraldry of the World. Blandford Pr. p. 211.  ^ Innes-Smith, Robert (1990). An Outline of Heraldry in England and Scotland. Pilgrim Press. p. 14. ISBN 0-900594-82-9. Mottos are not necessarily hereditary and can be adopted and changed at will.  ^ "USS Winston S. Churchill (DDG-81)". Archived from the original on 2007-10-10. Retrieved 2007-10-23.  ^ Cassells, Vic (2000). The capital ships: Their battles and their badges. Kangaroo Press. p. 190.  ^ "The Danish Invasions". Somerset County Council archives. Retrieved 26 June 2015.  ^ [1] ^ "Civic Heraldry of England and Wales – East Anglia and Essex Area". civicheraldry.co.uk. Retrieved 8 November 2009.  ^ "South Cambridgeshire". Rural Services Network. Retrieved 21 December 2013.  ^ The manual of heraldry : being a concise description of the several terms used, and containing a dictionary of every designation in the science. Illustrated by four hundred engravings on wood (5th ed.). Arthur Hall, Virtue & Co. 1800. p. 132. Retrieved 21 December 2013.  ^ Mark Antony Lower (1860), "Onslow", Patronymica Britannica  ^ Stevenson, Robert Louis (1907). Travels with a Donkey in the Cevennes. London: Chatto & Windus.  Wikimedia Commons has media related to Mottos. Look up motto in Wiktionary, the free dictionary. v t e Heraldry Authorities Law of heraldic arms See also Bartolus de Saxoferrato Officers of arms in the United Kingdom (King of Arms, Herald, Pursuivant) Private Officer of Arms Types of coats of arms Burgher arms Ecclesiastical heraldry Canting arms Attributed arms Banner of arms Blazons Argent Or Charge Divisions Field Lines Ordinary Tincture Bend Bordure Canton Chevron Chief Cross Fess Flaunch Pall Pale Saltire Achievements Cadency Crest Compartment Helmet Mantling Motto Quartering Impalement Shield Supporter Torse Related Armiger Heraldic flag Heraldic badge Vexillology Portal:Heraldry/Web resources Heraldry portal Authority control NDL: 00563851 Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Motto&oldid=706609105" Categories: Mottos Heraldry Hidden categories: Commons category with local link same as on Wikidata Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Article Talk Variants Views Read Edit View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Featured content Current events Random article Donate to Wikipedia Wikipedia store Interaction Help About Wikipedia Community portal Recent changes Contact page Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Cite this page Print/export Create a book Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Languages Адыгэбзэ Afrikaans العربية Asturianu বাংলা Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца)‎ Български Brezhoneg Català Cebuano Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto Estremeñu Euskara فارسی Français Frysk Gaeilge Gaelg Galego 한국어 हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Íslenska Italiano עברית Basa Jawa ქართული Kaszëbsczi Қазақша Latviešu Lietuvių Lingála Magyar Македонски മലയാളം Bahasa Melayu Baso Minangkabau Nederlands 日本語 Нохчийн Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پښتو Plattdüütsch Polski Português Ripoarisch Română Русский Scots Seeltersk Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Ślůnski Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Basa Sunda Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் Taqbaylit ไทย Türkçe Удмурт Українська Tiếng Việt Yorùbá 中文 Edit links This page was last modified on 24 February 2016, at 07:35. Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view