Graduation - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Graduation From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to: navigation, search For other uses, see Graduation (disambiguation). This article has multiple issues. Please help improve it (see how) or discuss these issues on the talk page. This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (June 2013) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) This article is missing information about History of graduation. Please expand the article to include this information. Further details may exist on the talk page. (May 2013) This article may require cleanup to meet Wikipedia's quality standards. The specific problem is: Horrid grammar issues and wikicode issues Please help improve this article if you can. (November 2015) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) Student receiving academic degree from Azim Premji during a Graduation ceremony. Adi Godrej in the background. Recipient and donors in "convocation dress". Convocation dress of University of Dhaka, Bangladesh Academic procession during the University of Canterbury graduation ceremony Student receives diploma from the Monterrey Institute of Technology and Higher Education, Mexico City Line of young people at a commencement ceremony Graduation is getting a diploma or academic degree or the ceremony that is sometimes associated, in which students become graduates. Before the graduation, candidates are referred to as graduands. The date of graduation is often called graduation day. The graduation ceremony itself is also called commencement, convocation or invocation. In the United States and Canada, the term is additionally increasingly being used to refer to the advancement from a primary or secondary school level. When ceremonies are associated, they usually include a procession of the academic staff and candidates and a valediction. At the college and university level the faculty will usually wear academic dress at the formal ceremonies, as will the trustees and degree candidates. "Graduation" at the college and university level occurs when the presiding officer confers degrees upon candidates, either individually or en masse, even if graduates physically receive their diploma later at a smaller college or departmental ceremony. After degree completion, graduates can be referred to by their graduating year. In some places, graduation parties to celebrate graduation from school, college or university are popular. In a recent 2014 nationwide survey in the United States, $985 was the average amount spent on graduation parties[1] Contents 1 Academic graduation by country 2 Origin and tradition for caps 3 Without caps 4 See also 5 Notes and references 6 External links Academic graduation by country[edit] Further information: Academic graduation by country The procedures and traditions surrounding academic graduation ceremonies differ around the world. Whereas in most countries a graduation usually only occurs at university level, in the United States graduations often occur at high schools where no higher education qualifications are conferred upon the graduates. In a graduation ceremony the students dress up in special graduation caps and clothing that are made just for this purpose. Graduation traditions are varied across universities observing different cultures. Most universities across Sweden are research-oriented and may present its students with bachelor's, master's, and doctor's degrees covering all academic streams. Universities across the country are based through the Higher Education Ordinance. A large number of candidates continue their education onto secondary and upper secondary education. Most of the national programs provide Swedish, English, Math and Science among majors. In Zimbabwe, graduation ceremonies are often associated with the guest of honor who most of is the ceremonial head of the institution. At state universities the President of Zimbabwe officiates as chancellor and guest of honor. Every graduate of a state university in Zimbabwe can claim to have shaken the President's hand. The person most associated with graduation at those institutions is President Robert Gabriel Mugabe. At other State Institutions of higher learning the vice Presidents or any other Senior Government officials may preside.[2] Origin and tradition for caps[edit] Graduation hats being tossed by fresh graduates in ISB (Hyderabad, India). The tradition of wearing graduation hats in Sweden has been in place since the mid 18th century. The cap is typically a white sailor hat with a black or dark blue band around it, a crown motif and a black peak at the front. The graduation hat tradition was initially brought into practice by students at Uppsala University. The headgear then became popular across several other European nations as well.[3] Without caps[edit] King's College London graduands wearing academic dresses without caps After being vested the power to award its own degrees from the University of London in 2006,[4] graduates of King's College London began wearing in 2008 an academic dress that does not feature a hat. Designed by Vivienne Westwood, the academic dress features instead an oversized hood that could be worn as a headgear by the graduands[5] With the influence of the University of London's tradition, being the first university in the world to devise a system of academic dress based on faculty colours,[6] the gowns and hoods have been designed with colours that reflect the university's faculties/schools/institutes of study and the level of the degree.[7] Owing to its unique shape, the hood cannot be folded flat.[8] University portal Education portal See also[edit] Academic dress Encaenia High school graduation examination Matriculation Notes and references[edit] ^ "Graduation Party Budget". graduationparty.com.  ^ "President Mugabe caps 1 986 at Nust | The Herald". www.herald.co.zw. Retrieved 2015-08-01.  ^ Elin Olsson. "Swedish high school graduation day". academia.edu.  ^ http://www.kcl.ac.uk/aboutkings/governance/about/index.aspx ^ Hume, Marion (September 2008). "Westwood unveils gowns" (PDF). London. Retrieved 24 June 2015.  ^ Groves, N. et al. (2011). "Shaw's Academical Dress of Great Britain and Ireland". Burgon Society. ^ http://alumni.kcl.ac.uk/page.aspx?pid=792 ^ Groves classification system External links[edit] The Stories Behind Graduation Traditions by Ethan Trex, Mental Floss Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Graduation&oldid=719134340" Categories: Educational stages School terminology Ceremonies Graduation Hidden categories: Articles needing additional references from June 2013 All articles needing additional references Articles to be expanded from May 2013 Articles needing cleanup from November 2015 All articles needing cleanup Cleanup tagged articles with a reason field from November 2015 Wikipedia pages needing cleanup from November 2015 Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Article Talk Variants Views Read Edit View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Featured content Current events Random article Donate to Wikipedia Wikipedia store Interaction Help About Wikipedia Community portal Recent changes Contact page Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Cite this page Print/export Create a book Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Languages العربية Català Čeština Cymraeg Español فارسی Français 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia ಕನ್ನಡ Lingála Bahasa Melayu 日本語 Oʻzbekcha/ўзбекча Português Simple English Slovenčina Suomi Svenska ไทย Українська 粵語 中文 Edit links This page was last modified on 7 May 2016, at 20:33. Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view