Latins - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Latins From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to: navigation, search For other uses, see Latin (disambiguation). Part of a series on Indo-European topics Languages List of Indo-European languages Historical Albanian African Romance Armenian Balto-Slavic Baltic Slavic Celtic Insular Celtic Germanic Hellenic Greek Indo-Iranian Indo-Aryan Iranian Italic Romance Extinct Anatolian Tocharian Paleo-Balkan Dacian Thracian Illyrian Phrygian Reconstructed Proto-Indo-European language Phonology: Sound laws, Accent, Ablaut Grammar Vocabulary Root Verbs Nouns Pronouns Numerals Particles Other Proto-Anatolian Proto-Armenian Proto-Germanic (Proto-Norse) Proto-Celtic Proto-Italic Proto-Greek Proto-Balto-Slavic (Proto-Slavic) Proto-Indo-Iranian (Proto-Iranian) Philology Hittite texts Hieroglyphic Luwian Linear B Rigveda Avesta Homer Behistun Gaulish epigraphy Latin epigraphy Runic epigraphy Ogam Gothic Bible Armenian Bible Slanting Brahmi Old Irish glosses Origins Indo-European migrations Homeland Kurgan hypothesis Eurasian nomads Indo-Aryan migrations Fringe theories Anatolian hypothesis Armenian hypothesis Indigenous Aryans Indo-Aryan migration debate Paleolithic Continuity Theory Archaeology Chalcolithic Steppe Kurgan culture Kurgan Cernavodă Yamna Kemi Oba Domestication of the horse Dnieper-Donets Samara Sredny Stog Khvalynsk Maykop Europe Corded ware Baden Middle Dnieper Cucuteni Funnelbeaker naval age Steppe Chariot Abashevo culture Andronovo Afanasevo Catacomb Sintashta Srubna Europe Beaker Tumulus Unetice Urnfield Lusatian Nordic Bronze Age Terramare Trzciniec South-Asia BMAC Yaz Gandhara grave Iron Age Steppe Chernoles Europe Thraco-Cimmerian Hallstatt Jastorf Caucasus Colchian India Painted Grey Ware Northern Black Polished Ware Peoples and societies Reconstructed Proto-Indo-Europeans Society Religion Historical Bronze Age Anatolians Armenians Mycenaean Greeks Indo-Iranians Iron Age Indo-Iranian Indo-Aryans Iranians Scythians Persians Medes Europe Celts Gauls Celtiberians Insular Celts Hellenic peoples Italic peoples Germanic peoples Paleo-Balkans/Anatolia: Thracians Dacians Illyrians Phrygians Middle Ages East-Asia Tocharians Europe Balts Slavs Albanians Medieval Europe Indo-Iranian Greater Persia Medieval India Religion and mythology Reconstructed Proto-Indo-European religion Proto-Indo-Iranian religion Historical Hittite Indian Vedic Hinduism Buddhism Jainism Iranian Persian Zoroastrianism Yazdânism Ossetian Europe Paleo-Balkans Armenian Greek Roman Celtic Gaelic Gaulish Germanic Anglo-Saxon Continental Norse Baltic Latvian Lithuanian Slavic Academic research Indo-European studies Encyclopedia of Indo-European Culture Copenhagen Studies in Indo-European Journal of Indo-European Studies Indogermanisches etymologisches Wörterbuch Indo-European Etymological Dictionary The Horse, the Wheel and Language v t e Latins referred originally to an Italic tribe in ancient central Italy. As Roman power spread Latin culture, Latins came to mean anyone who lives in a Latinized culture and speaks Latin or a Romance language (see Latin peoples). The original Latins were an Italic tribe inhabiting central Italy, in present-day Lazio. Through the conquests of their most populous city-state, Rome, the Latins culturally "Romanized" or "Latinized" the rest of Italy, and the word Latin ceased to mean a particular ethnicity, acquiring a more cultural sense. As the Roman Empire spread to include areas that are now Spain, Portugal, France, and Romania, these joined Italy in becoming "Latin," as the languages spoken in these countries derive primarily from the Latin Language. In the late 15th–16th centuries, a millennium after the fall of the Western Roman Empire, Portugal, Spain, and France began to create world empires. In consequence, by the mid-19th century, the former American colonies of these nations became known as Latin America and this region's inhabitants as Latin Americans. Contents 1 Antiquity 2 Middle Ages 3 Modern uses 3.1 Latin Europe 3.2 Latin America 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Antiquity[edit] Main article: Latins (Italic tribe) Further information: Latin League Italy in 400 BC. The Latins were an ancient Italic people of the Latium region in central Italy, (Latium Vetus - Old Latium), in the 1st millennium BC. Although they lived in independent city-states, they spoke a common language (Latin), held common religious beliefs, and shared a sense of kinship, expressed in the myth that all Latins descend from Latinus. Latinus was worshiped on Mons Albanus (Monte Albano) during an annual festival attended by all Latins, including those from Rome, one of the Latin states. The Latin cities extended common rights of residence and trade to one another. Rome's territorial ambitions united the rest of the Latins against it in 341 BC, but in the end Rome won in 338 BC. Consequently, some of the Latin states were incorporated within the Roman state, and their inhabitants were given full Roman citizenship. Others became Roman allies and enjoyed certain privileges. Middle Ages[edit] Further information: Latin Rite and Western Christianity After the fall of the Western Roman Empire, many Europeans held on to the "Latin" identity, more specifically, in the sense of the Romans, as members of the Empire. In the Byzantine Empire or East Roman Empire, and the broader Greek-Orthodox world, Latins was a synonym for all people who followed Roman Catholic Christianity.[1] It was generally a negative characterization, especially after the 1054 schism.[1] Latins is still used by the Orthodox church communities, but only in a theological context. The Holy Roman Empire was founded after the fall of Rome but brandished the name of the Roman people and honoured the king with the title "King of the Romans". Despite this, the Holy Roman Empire was largely a Germanic affair with German kings, although its territory was considerably greater than present-day Germany. Modern uses[edit] Latin Europe[edit] Main article: Latin Europeans The term "Latin" is used in reference to European people whose cultures are particularly Roman-derived, generally including the use of Romance languages and the traditional predominance of Roman Catholicism.[2] Strong Roman legal and cultural traditions characterize these nations. Latin Europe is a major subdivision of Europe, along with Germanic Europe and Slavic Europe. Latin America[edit] Main articles: Latin Americans and Latin America Of all world regions, the Americas have been most significantly influenced by Romance-speaking European countries in regards to culture, language, religion, and genetic contribution to the population. The Latin European-influenced region of the Americas came to be called Latin America in the 19th century. The French Emperor Napoleon III is often credited with this naming.[3] The term is usually used to refer to Spanish- and Portuguese-speaking countries, namely Hispanic America and Brazil. The majority of Latin Americans have Latin European ancestry, notably Italian, Spanish, French, and Portuguese. See also[edit] Latin peoples Latin Rights Latin Union References[edit] ^ a b George Ostrogorsky, History of the Byzantine State ^ Pérez-Perdomo, E.L.M.F.R. Legal Culture in the Age of Globalization: Latin America and Latin Europe. Stanford University Press. ISBN 9780804766951. Retrieved 2014-10-10.  ^ Chasteen, John Charles (2001). Born in Blood and Fire: A Concise History of Latin America. W. W. Norton. p. 156. ISBN 0-393-97613-0.  External links[edit] Distinguishing the terms: Latins and Romans Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Latins&oldid=715484776" Categories: Latin language Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Article Talk Variants Views Read Edit View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Featured content Current events Random article Donate to Wikipedia Wikipedia store Interaction Help About Wikipedia Community portal Recent changes Contact page Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Cite this page Print/export Create a book Download as PDF Printable version Languages Azərbaycanca Беларуская Български Català Čeština Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Français 한국어 Hrvatski Italiano עברית Kiswahili Latina Lietuvių Magyar Македонски Nederlands 日本語 Polski Português Română Русский Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links This page was last modified on 16 April 2016, at 03:01. Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view