Indo-European languages - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Indo-European languages From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to: navigation, search This article is about the family of languages found in much of Europe and Asia. For other uses, see Indo-European (disambiguation). Indo-European Geographic distribution: Before the 16th century: Europe, West, Central, and South Asia; today: worldwide Linguistic classification: One of the world's primary language families Proto-language: Proto-Indo-European Subdivisions: Albanian Anatolian (extinct) Armenian Balto-Slavic (Baltic and Slavic) Celtic Germanic Hellenic Indo-Iranian (Indo-Aryan, Iranian, and Nuristani) Italic (including Romance) Tocharian (extinct) ISO 639-2 / 5: ine Glottolog: indo1319[1] Present-day native distribution of Indo-European languages, within their homeland of Eurasia:   Albanian   Armenian   Balto-Slavic (Baltic)   Balto-Slavic (Slavic)   Celtic   Germanic   Hellenic (Greek)   Indo-Iranian (Indo-Aryan, Iranian, and Nuristani)   Italic (Romance)   Non-Indo-European languages Dotted/striped areas indicate where multilingualism is common Part of a series on Indo-European topics Languages List of Indo-European languages Historical Albanian African Romance Armenian Balto-Slavic Baltic Slavic Celtic Insular Celtic Germanic Hellenic Greek Indo-Iranian Indo-Aryan Iranian Italic Romance Extinct Anatolian Tocharian Paleo-Balkan Dacian Thracian Illyrian Phrygian Reconstructed Proto-Indo-European language Phonology: Sound laws, Accent, Ablaut Grammar Vocabulary Root Verbs Nouns Pronouns Numerals Particles Other Proto-Anatolian Proto-Armenian Proto-Germanic (Proto-Norse) Proto-Celtic Proto-Italic Proto-Greek Proto-Balto-Slavic (Proto-Slavic) Proto-Indo-Iranian (Proto-Iranian) Philology Hittite texts Hieroglyphic Luwian Linear B Rigveda Avesta Homer Behistun Gaulish epigraphy Latin epigraphy Runic epigraphy Ogam Gothic Bible Armenian Bible Slanting Brahmi Old Irish glosses Origins Indo-European migrations Homeland Kurgan hypothesis Eurasian nomads Indo-Aryan migrations Fringe theories Anatolian hypothesis Armenian hypothesis Indigenous Aryans Indo-Aryan migration debate Paleolithic Continuity Theory Archaeology Chalcolithic Steppe Kurgan culture Kurgan Cernavodă Yamna Kemi Oba Domestication of the horse Dnieper-Donets Samara Sredny Stog Khvalynsk Maykop Europe Corded ware Baden Middle Dnieper Cucuteni Funnelbeaker naval age Steppe Chariot Abashevo culture Andronovo Afanasevo Catacomb Sintashta Srubna Europe Beaker Tumulus Unetice Urnfield Lusatian Nordic Bronze Age Terramare Trzciniec South-Asia BMAC Yaz Gandhara grave Iron Age Steppe Chernoles Europe Thraco-Cimmerian Hallstatt Jastorf Caucasus Colchian India Painted Grey Ware Northern Black Polished Ware Peoples and societies Reconstructed Proto-Indo-Europeans Society Religion Historical Bronze Age Anatolians Armenians Mycenaean Greeks Indo-Iranians Iron Age Indo-Iranian Indo-Aryans Iranians Scythians Persians Medes Europe Celts Gauls Celtiberians Insular Celts Hellenic peoples Italic peoples Germanic peoples Paleo-Balkans/Anatolia: Thracians Dacians Illyrians Phrygians Middle Ages East-Asia Tocharians Europe Balts Slavs Albanians Medieval Europe Indo-Iranian Greater Persia Medieval India Religion and mythology Reconstructed Proto-Indo-European religion Proto-Indo-Iranian religion Historical Hittite Indian Vedic Hinduism Buddhism Jainism Iranian Persian Zoroastrianism Yazdânism Ossetian Europe Paleo-Balkans Armenian Greek Roman Celtic Gaelic Gaulish Germanic Anglo-Saxon Continental Norse Baltic Latvian Lithuanian Slavic Academic research Indo-European studies Encyclopedia of Indo-European Culture Copenhagen Studies in Indo-European Journal of Indo-European Studies Indogermanisches etymologisches Wörterbuch Indo-European Etymological Dictionary The Horse, the Wheel and Language v t e The Indo-European languages are a family of several hundred related languages and dialects. There are about 445 living Indo-European languages, according to the estimate by Ethnologue, with over two-thirds (313) of them belonging to the Indo-Iranian branch.[2] The Indo-European family includes most of the modern languages of Europe, and parts of Western, Central and South Asia. It was also predominant in ancient Anatolia (present-day Turkey), and the ancient Tarim Basin (present-day Northwest China) and most of Central Asia until the invasion and migrations of Turkic speakers especially during the Mongol–Turkic conquest in the 13th century. With written evidence appearing since the Bronze Age in the form of the Anatolian languages and Mycenaean Greek, the Indo-European family is significant to the field of historical linguistics as possessing the second-longest recorded history, after the Afroasiatic family. Several disputed proposals link Indo-European to other major language families. Contents 1 History of Indo-European linguistics 2 Classification 2.1 Grouping 2.2 Tree versus wave model 2.3 Proposed subgroupings 2.4 Satem and centum languages 2.5 Suggested macrofamilies 3 Evolution 3.1 Proto-Indo-European 3.2 Diversification 3.3 Important languages for reconstruction 3.4 Sound changes 3.5 Comparison of conjugations 4 Comparison of cognates 5 Present distribution of Indo-European languages 6 See also 7 References 8 Sources 9 Further reading 10 External links 10.1 Databases 10.2 Lexica History of Indo-European linguistics[edit] Main article: Indo-European studies In the 16th century, European visitors to the Indian subcontinent began to suggest similarities among Indo-Aryan, Iranian, and European languages. In 1583, English Jesuit missionary Thomas Stephens in Goa wrote a letter to his brother (not published until the 20th century)[3] in which he noted similarities between Indian languages (specifically Sanskrit) and Greek and Latin. Another account to mention the ancient language Sanskrit came from Filippo Sassetti, a merchant born in Florence in 1540, who travelled to the Indian subcontinent. Writing in 1585, he noted some word similarities between Sanskrit and Italian (these included devaḥ/dio "God", sarpaḥ/serpe "serpent", sapta/sette "seven", aṣṭa/otto "eight", and nava/nove "nine").[3] However, neither Stephens's nor Sassetti's observations led to further scholarly inquiry.[3] In 1647, Dutch linguist and scholar Marcus Zuerius van Boxhorn noted the similarity among certain Asian and European languages and supposed that they were derived from a primitive common language which he called Scythian. He included in his hypothesis Dutch, Albanian, Greek, Latin, Persian, and German, later adding Slavic, Celtic, and Baltic languages. However, Van Boxhorn's suggestions did not become widely known and did not stimulate further research. Franz Bopp, pioneer in the field of comparative linguistic studies. Ottoman Turkish traveller Evliya Çelebi visited Vienna in 1665–1666 as part of a diplomatic mission and noted a few similarities between words in German and in Persian. Gaston Coeurdoux and others made observations of the same type. Coeurdoux made a thorough comparison of Sanskrit, Latin and Greek conjugations in the late 1760s to suggest a relationship among them. Meanwhile, Mikhail Lomonosov compared different language groups, including Slavic, Baltic ("Kurlandic"), Iranian ("Medic"), Finnish, Chinese, "Hottentot", and others, noting that related languages (including Latin, Greek, German and Russian) must have separated in antiquity from common ancestors.[4] The hypothesis reappeared in 1786 when Sir William Jones first lectured on the striking similarities among three of the oldest languages known in his time: Latin, Greek, and Sanskrit, to which he tentatively added Gothic, Celtic, and Persian,[5] though his classification contained some inaccuracies and omissions.[6] Thomas Young first used the term Indo-European in 1813, deriving from the geographical extremes of the language family: from Western Europe to North India.[7][8] A synonym is Indo-Germanic (Idg. or IdG.), specifying the family's southeasternmost and northwesternmost branches. This first appeared in French (indo-germanique) in 1810 in the work of Conrad Malte-Brun; in most languages this term is now dated or less common than Indo-European, although in German indogermanisch remains the standard scientific term. A number of other synonymous terms have also been used. Franz Bopp's Comparative Grammar appeared between 1833 and 1852 and marks the beginning of Indo-European studies as an academic discipline. The classical phase of Indo-European comparative linguistics leads from this work to August Schleicher's 1861 Compendium and up to Karl Brugmann's Grundriss, published in the 1880s. Brugmann's neogrammarian reevaluation of the field and Ferdinand de Saussure's development of the laryngeal theory may be considered[by whom?] the beginning of "modern" Indo-European studies. The generation of Indo-Europeanists active in the last third of the 20th century (such as Calvert Watkins, Jochem Schindler, and Helmut Rix) developed a better understanding of morphology and of ablaut in the wake of Kuryłowicz's 1956 Apophonie.[citation needed] Classification[edit] Classification of Indo-European languages. Red: Extinct languages. White: categories or unattested proto-languages. Left half: centum languages; right half: satem languages Predominant Indo-European languages in Europe:   Germanic   Romanic   Slavic   Baltic   Hellenic (Greek)   Albanian   Non-Indo-European See also: Indo-European migrations and List of languages by first written accounts The various subgroups of the Indo-European language family include ten major branches, given in the chronological order of their emergence according to David Anthony:[9] Anatolian (Asia Minor), the earliest attested branch. Emerged around 4200 BC.[9] Isolated terms in Luwian/Hittite mentioned in Semitic Old Assyrian texts from the 20th and 19th centuries BC, Hittite texts from about 1650 BC;[10][11] extinct by Late Antiquity. Tocharian, emerged around 3700 BC,[9] extant in two dialects (Turfanian and Kuchean, or Tocharian A and B), attested from roughly the 6th to the 9th century AD. Marginalized by the Old Turkic Uyghur Khaganate and probably extinct by the 10th century. Germanic (from Proto-Germanic), emerged around 3300 BC,[9] earliest testimonies in runic inscriptions from around the 2nd century AD, earliest coherent texts in Gothic, 4th century AD. Old English manuscript tradition from about the 8th century AD. Italic, including Latin and its descendants (the Romance languages), emerged around 3000 BC,[9] attested from the 7th century BC. Celtic, descended from Proto-Celtic, emerged around 3000 BC.[9] Lepontic inscriptions date as early as the 6th century BC; Celtiberian from the 2nd century BC; Primitive Irish Ogham inscriptions from the 5th century AD, earliest inscriptions in Old Welsh from the 8th century AD. Armenian, emerged around 2800 BC.[9] Alphabet writings known from the beginning of the 5th century AD. Balto-Slavic, emerged around 2800 BC,[9] believed by most Indo-Europeanists[12] to form a phylogenetic unit, while a minority ascribes similarities to prolonged language contact. Slavic (from Proto-Slavic), attested from the 9th century AD (possibly earlier; see Slavic runes), earliest texts in Old Church Slavonic. Baltic, attested from the 14th century AD; for languages attested that late, they retain unusually many archaic features attributed to Proto-Indo-European (PIE). Hellenic, emerged around 2500 BC.[9] Fragmentary records in Mycenaean Greek from between 1450 and 1350 BC have been found.[13] Homeric texts date to the 8th century BC. (See Proto-Greek, History of Greek.) Indo-Iranian, emerged around 2200 BC,[9] attested circa 1400 BC, descended from Proto-Indo-Iranian (dated to the late 3rd millennium BC). Indo-Aryan (including Dardic), attested from around 1400 BC in Hittite texts from Asia Minor, showing traces of Indo-Aryan words.[14][15] Epigraphically from the 3rd century BC in the form of Prakrit (Edicts of Ashoka). The Rigveda is assumed to preserve intact records via oral tradition dating from about the mid-2nd millennium BC in the form of Vedic Sanskrit. Iranian or Iranic, attested from roughly 1000 BC in the form of Avestan. Epigraphically from 520 BC in the form of Old Persian (Behistun inscription). Nuristani Albanian, attested from the 14th century AD; Proto-Albanian language likely evolved from Paleo-Balkan predecessors.[16][17] In addition to the classical ten branches listed above, several extinct and little-known languages have existed: Illyrian: possibly related to Messapian, Albanian, or both Venetic: shares several similarities with Latin and the Italic languages, but also has some affinities with other IE languages, especially Germanic and Celtic.[18][19] Liburnian: doubtful affiliation, features shared with Venetic, Illyrian, and Indo-Hittite, significant transition of the Pre-Indo-European elements Messapian: not conclusively deciphered Phrygian: language of the ancient Phrygians Paionian: extinct language once spoken north of Macedon Thracian: possibly including Dacian Dacian: possibly very close to Thracian Ancient Macedonian: proposed relationship to Greek. Ligurian—possibly close to or part of Celtic.[20] Sicel: an ancient language spoken by the Sicels (Greek Sikeloi, Latin Siculi), one of the three indigenous (i.e. pre-Greek and pre-Punic) tribes of Sicily. Proposed relationship to Latin or proto-Illyrian (Pre-Indo-European) at an earlier stage.[21] Lusitanian: possibly related to (or part of) Celtic, Ligurian, or Italic Cimmerian: possibly Iranic, Thracian, or Celtic Grouping[edit] Further information: Language families Membership of these languages in the Indo-European language family is determined by genetic relationships, meaning that all members are presumed descendants of a common ancestor, Proto-Indo-European. (The word "genetic" here has nothing to do with human genetics; it refers to relationships between languages.) Membership in the various branches, groups and subgroups of Indo-European is also genetic, but here the defining factors are shared innovations among various languages, suggesting a common ancestor that split off from other Indo-European groups. For example, what makes the Germanic languages a branch of Indo-European is that much of their structure and phonology can be stated in rules that apply to all of them. Many of their common features are presumed innovations that took place in Proto-Germanic, the source of all the Germanic languages. Tree versus wave model[edit] See also: Language change The "tree model" is considered an appropriate representation of the genetic history of a language family if communities do not remain in contact after their languages have started to diverge. In this case, subgroups defined by shared innovations form a nested pattern. The tree model is not appropriate in cases where languages remain in contact as they diversify; in such cases subgroups may overlap, and the "wave model" is a more accurate representation.[22] Most approaches to Indo-European subgrouping to date have assumed that the tree model is by and large valid for Indo-European;[23] however, there is also a long tradition of wave-model approaches.[24][25][26] In addition to genetic changes, many of the early changes in Indo-European languages can be attributed to language contact. It has been asserted, for example, that many of the more striking features shared by Italic languages (Latin, Oscan, Umbrian, etc.) might well be areal features. More certainly, very similar-looking alterations in the systems of long vowels in the West Germanic languages greatly postdate any possible notion of a proto-language innovation (and cannot readily be regarded as "areal", either, because English and continental West Germanic were not a linguistic area). In a similar vein, there are many similar innovations in Germanic and Balto-Slavic that are far more likely areal features than traceable to a common proto-language, such as the uniform development of a high vowel (*u in the case of Germanic, *i/u in the case of Baltic and Slavic) before the PIE syllabic resonants *ṛ,* ḷ, *ṃ, *ṇ, unique to these two groups among IE languages, which is in agreement with the wave model. The Balkan sprachbund even features areal convergence among members of very different branches. Using an extension to the Ringe-Warnow model of language evolution, early IE was confirmed to have featured limited contact between distinct lineages, whereas only the Germanic subfamily exhibited a less treelike behaviour as it acquired some characteristics from neighbours early in its evolution rather than from its direct ancestors. The internal diversification of especially West Germanic is cited to have been radically non-treelike.[27] Proposed subgroupings[edit] Hypothetical Indo-European phylogenetic clades Balkan Daco-Thracian Graeco-Armenian Graeco-Aryan Graeco-Phrygian Hellenic Thraco-Illyrian Other Italo-Celtic Indo-Hittite Indo-Uralic v t e Specialists have postulated the existence of higher-order subgroups such as Italo-Celtic, Graeco-Armenian, Graeco-Aryan, and Balto-Slavo-Germanic. However, unlike the ten traditional branches, these are all controversial to a greater or lesser degree.[28] The Italo-Celtic subgroup was at one point uncontroversial, considered by Antoine Meillet to be even better established than Balto-Slavic.[29] The main lines of evidence included the genitive suffix -ī; the superlative suffix -m̥mo; the change of /p/ to /kʷ/ before another /kʷ/ in the same word (as in penkʷe > *kʷenkʷe > Latin quīnque, Old Irish cóic); and the subjunctive morpheme -ā-.[30] This evidence was prominently challenged by Calvert Watkins;[31] but other, stronger evidence has since emerged.[32] Evidence for a relationship between Greek and Armenian includes the regular change of the second laryngeal to a at the beginnings of words, as well as terms for "woman" and "sheep".[33] Greek and Indo-Iranian share innovations mainly in verbal morphology and patterns of nominal derivation.[34] Relations have also been proposed between Phrygian and Greek,[35] and between Thracian and Armenian.[36][37] Some fundamental shared features, like the aorist (a verb form denoting action without reference to duration or completion) having the perfect active particle -s fixed to the stem, link this group closer to Anatolian languages[38] and Tocharian. Shared features with Balto-Slavic languages, on the other hand (especially present and preterit formations), might be due to later contacts.[39] The Indo-Hittite hypothesis proposes the Indo-European language family to consist of two main branches: one represented by the Anatolian languages and another branch encompassing all other Indo-European languages. Features that separate Anatolian from all other branches of Indo-European (such as the gender or the verb system) have been interpreted alternately as archaic debris or as innovations due to prolonged isolation. Points proffered in favour of the Indo-Hittite hypothesis are the (non-universal) Indo-European agricultural terminology in Anatolia[40] and the preservation of laryngeals.[41] However, in general this hypothesis is considered to attribute too much weight to the Anatolian evidence. According to another view, the Anatolian subgroup left the Indo-European parent language comparatively late, approximately at the same time as Indo-Iranian and later than the Greek or Armenian divisions. A third view, especially prevalent in the so-called French school of Indo-European studies, holds that extant similarities in non-satem languages in general — including Anatolian — might be due to their peripheral location in the Indo-European language area and early separation, rather than indicating a special ancestral relationship.[42] Hans J. Holm, based on lexical calculations, arrives at a picture roughly replicating the general scholarly opinion and refuting the Indo-Hittite hypothesis.[43] Satem and centum languages[edit] Some significant isoglosses in Indo-European daughter languages at around 500 BC.   Blue: centum languages   Red: satem languages   Orange: languages with augment   Green: languages with PIE *-tt- > -ss-   Tan: languages with PIE *-tt- > -st-   Pink: languages with instrumental, dative and ablative plural endings (and some others) in *-m- rather than *-bh- Main article: Centum and satem languages The division of the Indo-European languages into satem and centum groups was put forward by Peter von Bradke in 1890, although a similar type of division had been proposed by Karl Brugmann in 1886. In the satem languages, which include the Balto-Slavic and Indo-Iranian branches, as well as (in most respects) Albanian and Armenian, the reconstructed Proto-Indo-European palatovelars remained distinct and were fricativized, while the labiovelars merged with the "plain velars". In the centum languages, the palatovelars merged with the plain velars, while the labiovelars remained distinct. The results of these alternative developments are exemplified by the words for "hundred" in Avestan (satem) and Latin (centum) – the initial palatovelar developed into a fricative [s] in the former, but became an ordinary velar [k] in the latter. Rather than being a genetic separation, the centum–satem division is commonly seen as resulting from innovative changes that spread across PIE dialect branches over a particular geographical area; the centum–satem isogloss intersects a number of other isoglosses that mark distinctions between features in the early IE branches. It may be that the centum branches in fact reflect the original state of affairs in PIE, and only the satem branches shared a set of innovations, which affected all but the peripheral areas of the PIE dialect continuum.[44] Kortlandt proposes that the ancestors of Balts and Slavs took part in satemization before being drawn later into the western Indo-European sphere.[45] Suggested macrofamilies[edit] See also: Origin of language Some linguists propose that Indo-European languages form part of one of several hypothetical macrofamilies. However, these theories remain highly controversial, not being accepted by most linguists in the field. Some of the smaller proposed macrofamilies are: Pontic, postulated by John Colarusso, which joins Indo-European with Northwest Caucasian. Indo-Uralic, joining Indo-European with Uralic. Other, greater proposed families including Indo-European languages, are: Eurasiatic, a theory championed by Joseph Greenberg. Nostratic, comprising all or some of the Eurasiatic languages, as well as the Kartvelian, Uralic, Dravidian (or even the Elamo-Dravidian macrofamily), Altaic, and Afroasiatic language families. Objections to such groupings are not based on any theoretical claim about the likely historical existence or non-existence of such macrofamilies; it is entirely reasonable to suppose that they might have existed. The serious difficulty lies in identifying the details of actual relationships between language families, because it is very hard to find concrete evidence that transcends chance resemblance, or is not equally likely explained as being due to borrowing (including Wanderwörter, which can travel very long distances). Because the signal-to-noise ratio in historical linguistics declines steadily over time, at great enough time-depths it becomes open to reasonable doubt that it can even be possible to distinguish between signal and noise. Evolution[edit] Proto-Indo-European[edit] Main article: Proto-Indo-European language Scheme of Indo-European migrations from ca. 4000 to 1000 BC according to the Kurgan hypothesis. The proposed Proto-Indo-European language (PIE) is the hypothetical common ancestor of the Indo-European languages, spoken by the Proto-Indo-Europeans. From the 1960s, knowledge of Anatolian became certain enough to establish its relationship to PIE. Using the method of internal reconstruction an earlier stage, called Pre-Proto-Indo-European, has been proposed. PIE was an inflected language, in which the grammatical relationships between words were signaled through inflectional morphemes (usually endings). The roots of PIE are basic morphemes carrying a lexical meaning. By addition of suffixes, they form stems, and by addition of desinences (usually endings), these form grammatically inflected words (nouns or verbs). The hypothetical Indo-European verb system is complex and, like the noun, exhibits a system of ablaut. Diversification[edit] See also: Indo-European migrations Indo-European languages ca. 3500 BC Indo-European languages ca. 2500 BC Indo-European languages ca. 1500 BC Indo-European languages ca. 500 BC Indo-European languages ca. 500 AD The diversification of the parent language into the attested branches of daughter languages is historically unattested. The timeline of the evolution of the various daughter languages, on the other hand, is mostly undisputed, quite regardless of the question of Indo-European origins. Using a mathematical analysis borrowed from evolutionary biology, Don Ringe and Tandy Warnow propose the following evolutionary tree of Indo-European branches:[46] Pre-Anatolian (before 3500 BC) Pre-Tocharian Pre-Italic and Pre-Celtic (before 2500 BC) Pre-Armenian and Pre-Greek (after 2500 BC) Pre-Germanic and Pre-Balto-Slavic;[46] proto-Germanic ca. 500 BC[47] Proto-Indo-Iranian (2000 BC) David Anthony proposes the following sequence:[9] Pre-Anatolian (4200 BC) Pre-Tocharian (3700 BC) Pre-Germanic (3300 BC) Pre-Italic and Pre-Celtic (3000 BC) Pre-Armenian (2800 BC) Pre-Balto-Slavic (2800 BC) Pre-Greek (2500 BC) Proto-Indo-Iranian (2200 BC); split between Iranian and Old Indic 1800 BC From 1500 BC the following sequence may be given: 1500 BC–1000 BC: The Nordic Bronze Age develops pre-Proto-Germanic, and the (pre)-Proto-Celtic Urnfield and Hallstatt cultures emerge in Central Europe, introducing the Iron Age. Migration of the Proto-Italic speakers into the Italian peninsula (Bagnolo stele). Redaction of the Rigveda and rise of the Vedic civilization in the Punjab. The Mycenaean civilization gives way to the Greek Dark Ages. 1000 BC–500 BC: The Celtic languages spread over Central and Western Europe. Baltic languages are spoken in a huge area from present-day Poland to the Ural Mountains.[48] Proto Germanic. Homer and the beginning of Classical Antiquity. The Vedic Civilization gives way to the Mahajanapadas. Siddhartha Gautama preaches Buddhism. Zoroaster composes the Gathas, rise of the Achaemenid Empire, replacing the Elamites and Babylonia. Separation of Proto-Italic into Osco-Umbrian and Latin-Faliscan. Genesis of the Greek and Old Italic alphabets. A variety of Paleo-Balkan languages are spoken in Southern Europe. 500 BC–1 BC/AD: Classical Antiquity: spread of Greek and Latin throughout the Mediterranean and, during the Hellenistic period (Indo-Greeks), to Central Asia and the Hindukush. Kushan Empire, Mauryan Empire. Proto-Germanic. The Anatolian languages are extinct. 1 BC/ AD 500: Late Antiquity, Gupta period; attestation of Armenian. Proto-Slavic. The Roman Empire and then the Migration period marginalize the Celtic languages to the British Isles. 500–1000: Early Middle Ages. The Viking Age forms an Old Norse koine spanning Scandinavia, the British Isles and Iceland. The Islamic conquest and the Turkic expansion results in the Arabization and Turkification of significant areas where Indo-European languages were spoken. Tocharian is extinct in the course of the Turkic expansion while Northeastern Iranian (Scytho-Sarmatian) is reduced to small refugia. Slavic languages spread over wide areas in central, eastern and southeastern Europe, largely replacing Romance in the Balkans (with the exception of Romanian) and whatever was left of the paleo-Balkan languages with the exception of Albanian. 1000–1500: Late Middle Ages: Attestation of Albanian and Baltic. 1500–2000: Early Modern period to present: Colonialism results in the spread of Indo-European languages to every continent, most notably Romance (North, Central and South America, North and Sub-Saharan Africa, West Asia), West Germanic (English in North America, Sub-Saharan Africa, East Asia and Australia; to a lesser extent Dutch and German), and Russian to Central Asia and North Asia. Important languages for reconstruction[edit] In reconstructing the history of the Indo-European languages and the form of the Proto-Indo-European language, some languages have been of particular importance. These generally include the ancient Indo-European languages that are both well-attested and documented at an early date, although some languages from later periods are important if they are particularly linguistically conservative (most notably, Lithuanian). Early poetry is of special significance because of the rigid poetic meter normally employed, which makes it possible to reconstruct a number of features (e.g. vowel length) that were either unwritten or corrupted in the process of transmission down to the earliest extant written manuscripts. Most important of all: Vedic Sanskrit (c. 1500 – 500 BC). This language is unique in that its source documents were all composed orally, and were passed down through oral tradition (shakha schools) for c. 2,000 years before ever being written down. The oldest documents are all in poetic form; oldest and most important of all is the Rig Veda (c. 1500 BC). Mycenaean Greek (c. 1450 BC)[49] and Ancient Greek (c. 750 – 400 BC). Mycenaean Greek is the oldest recorded form, but its value is lessened by the limited material, restricted subject matter, and highly ambiguous writing system. More important is Ancient Greek, documented extensively beginning with the two Homeric poems (the Iliad and the Odyssey, c. 750 BC). Hittite (c. 1700 – 1200 BC). This is the earliest-recorded of all Indo-European languages, and highly divergent from the others due to the early separation of the Anatolian languages from the remainder. It possesses some highly archaic features found only fragmentarily, if at all, in other languages. At the same time, however, it appears to have undergone a large number of early phonological and grammatical changes which, combined with the ambiguities of its writing system, hinder its usefulness somewhat. Other primary sources: Latin, attested in a huge amount of poetic and prose material in the Classical period (c. 200 BC – 100 AD) and limited older material from as early as c. 600 BC. Gothic (the most archaic well-documented Germanic language, c. 350 AD), along with the combined witness of the other old Germanic languages: most importantly, Old English (c. 800 – 1000 AD), Old High German (c. 750 – 1000 AD) and Old Norse (c. 1100 – 1300 AD, with limited earlier sources dating all the way back to c. 200 AD). Old Avestan (c. 1700 – 1200 BC) and Younger Avestan (c. 900 BC). Documentation is sparse, but nonetheless quite important due to its highly archaic nature. Modern Lithuanian, with limited records in Old Lithuanian (c. 1500 – 1700 AD). Old Church Slavonic (c. 900 – 1000 AD). Other secondary sources, of lesser value due to poor attestation: Luwian, Lycian, Lydian and other Anatolian languages (c. 1400 – 400 BC). Oscan, Umbrian and other Old Italic languages (c. 600 – 200 BC). Old Persian (c. 500 BC). Old Prussian (c. 1350 – 1600 AD); even more archaic than Lithuanian. Other secondary sources, of lesser value due to extensive phonological changes and relatively limited attestation: Old Irish (c. 700 – 850 AD). Tocharian (c. 500 – 800 AD), underwent large phonetic shifts and mergers in the proto-language, and has an almost entirely reworked declension system. Classical Armenian (c. 400 – 500 AD). Albanian (c. 1450 – current time). Sound changes[edit] Main article: Indo-European sound laws As the Proto-Indo-European (PIE) language broke up, its sound system diverged as well, changing according to various sound laws evidenced in the daughter languages. PIE is normally reconstructed with a complex system of 15 stop consonants, including an unusual three-way phonation (voicing) distinction between voiceless, voiced and "voiced aspirated" (i.e. breathy voiced) stops, and a three-way distinction among velar consonants (k-type sounds) between "palatal" ḱ ǵ ǵh, "plain velar" k g gh and labiovelar kʷ gʷ gʷh. (The correctness of the terms palatal and plain velar is disputed; see Proto-Indo-European phonology.) All daughter languages have reduced the number of distinctions among these sounds, often in divergent ways. As an example, in English, one of the Germanic languages, the following are some of the major changes that happened: As in other centum languages, the "plain velar" and "palatal" stops merged, reducing the number of stops from 15 to 12. As in the other Germanic languages, the Germanic sound shift changed the realization of all stop consonants, with each consonant shifting to a different one: bʰ → b → p → f dʰ → d → t → θ gʰ → g → k → x (Later initial x →h) gʷʰ → gʷ → kʷ → xʷ (Later initial xʷ →hʷ) Each original consonant shifted one position to the right. For example, original dʰ became d, while original d became t and original t became θ (written th in English). This is the original source of the English sounds written f, th, h and wh. Examples, comparing English with Latin, where the sounds largely remain unshifted: For PIE p: piscis vs. fish; pēs, pēdis vs. foot; pluvium "rain" vs. flow; pater vs. father For PIE t: trēs vs. three; māter vs. mother For PIE d: decem vs. ten; pēdis vs. foot; quid vs. what For PIE k: centum vs. hund(red); capere "to take" vs. have For PIE kʷ: quid vs. what; quandō vs. when Various further changes affected consonants in the middle or end of a word: The voiced stops resulting from the sound shift were softened to voiced fricatives (or perhaps the sound shift directly generated fricatives in these positions). Verner's law also turned some of the voiceless fricatives resulting from the sound shift into voiced fricatives or stops. This is why the t in Latin centum ends up as d in hund(red) rather than the expected th. Most remaining h sounds disappeared, while remaining f and th became voiced. For example, Latin decem ends up as ten with no h in the middle (but note taíhun "ten" in Gothic, an archaic Germanic language). Similarly, the words seven and have have a voiced v (compare Latin septem, capere), while father and mother have a voiced th, although not spelled differently (compare Latin pater, māter). None of the daughter-language families (except possibly Anatolian, particularly Luvian) reflect the plain velar stops differently from the other two series, and there is even a certain amount of dispute whether this series existed at all in PIE. The major distinction between centum and satem languages corresponds to the outcome of the PIE plain velars: The "central" satem languages (Indo-Iranian, Balto-Slavic, Albanian, and Armenian) reflect both "plain velar" and labiovelar stops as plain velars, often with secondary palatalization before a front vowel (e i ē ī). The "palatal" stops are palatalized and often appear as sibilants (usually but not always distinct from the secondarily palatalized stops). The "peripheral" centum languages (Germanic, Italic, Celtic, Greek, Anatolian and Tocharian) reflect both "palatal" and "plain velar" stops as plain velars, while the labiovelars continue unchanged, often with later reduction into plain labial or velar consonants. The three-way PIE distinction between voiceless, voiced and voiced aspirated stops is considered extremely unusual from the perspective of linguistic typology—particularly in the existence of voiced aspirated stops without a corresponding series of voiceless aspirated stops. None of the various daughter-language families continue it unchanged, with numerous "solutions" to the apparently unstable PIE situation: The Indo-Aryan languages preserve the three series unchanged but have evolved a fourth series of voiceless aspirated consonants. The Iranian languages probably passed through the same stage, subsequently changing the aspirated stops into fricatives. Greek converted the voiced aspirates into voiceless aspirates. Italic probably passed through the same stage, but reflects the voiced aspirates as voiceless fricatives, especially f (or sometimes plain voiced stops in Latin). Celtic, Balto-Slavic, Anatolian, and Albanian merge the voiced aspirated into plain voiced stops. Germanic and Armenian change all three series in a chain shift (e.g. with bh b p becoming b p f (known as Grimm's law in Germanic). Among the other notable changes affecting consonants are: The Ruki sound law (s becomes /ʃ/ before r, u, k, i) in the satem languages. Loss of prevocalic p in Proto-Celtic. Development of prevocalic s to h in Proto-Greek, with later loss of h between vowels. Verner's law in Proto-Germanic. Grassmann's law (dissimilation of aspirates) independently in Proto-Greek and Proto-Indo-Iranian. The following table shows the basic outcomes of PIE consonants in some of the most important daughter languages for the purposes of reconstruction. For a fuller table, see Indo-European sound laws. Proto-Indo-European consonants and their reflexes in selected Indo-European daughter languages PIE Skr. O.C.S. Lith. Greek Latin Old Irish Gothic English Examples PIE Eng. Skr. Gk. Lat. Lith. etc. *p p; phH p Ø; chT [x] f; `-b- [β] f; -v/f- *pṓds ~ *ped- foot pád- poús (podós) pēs (pedis) pãdas *t t; thH t t; -th- [θ] þ [θ]; `-d- [ð]; tT- th; `-d-; tT- *tréyes three tráyas treĩs trēs trỹs *ḱ ś [ɕ] s š [ʃ] k c [k] c [k]; -ch- [x] h; `-g- [ɣ] h; -Ø-; `-y- *ḱm̥tóm hund(red) śatám he-katón centum šimtas *k k; cE [tʃ]; khH k; čE [tʃ]; cE' [ts] k *kreuh₂ "raw meat" OE hrēaw > raw kravíṣ- kréas cruor kraûjas *kʷ p; tE; k(u) qu [kʷ]; c(O) [k] ƕ [ʍ]; `-gw/w- wh; `-w- *kʷid, kʷod what kím tí quid, quod kas, kad *kʷekʷlom wheel cakrá- kúklos kãklas *b b; bhH b b [b]; -[β]- p *d d; dhH d d [d]; -[ð]- t *déḱm̥(t) ten, Goth. taíhun dáśa déka decem dẽšimt *ǵ j [dʒ]; hH [ɦ] z ž [ʒ] g g [ɡ]; -[ɣ]- k c / k; chE' *ǵénu, *ǵnéu- OE cnēo > knee jā́nu gónu genu *g g; jE [dʒ]; ghH; hH,E [ɦ] g; žE [ʒ]; dzE' g *yugóm yoke yugám zugón iugum jùngas *gʷ b; de; g(u) u [w > v]; gun− [ɡʷ] b [b]; -[β]- q [kʷ] qu *gʷīw- quick "alive" jīvá- bíos, bíotos vīvus gývas *bʰ bh; b..Ch b ph; p..Ch f-; b b [b]; -[β]-; -f b; -v/f-(rl) *bʰerō bear "carry" bhar- phérō ferō OCS berǫ *dʰ dh; d..Ch d th; t..Ch f-; d; b(r),l,u- d [d]; -[ð]- d [d]; -[ð]-; -þ d *dʰwer-, dʰur- door dhvā́raḥ thurā́ forēs dùrys *ǵʰ h [ɦ]; j..Ch z ž [ʒ] kh; k..Ch h; h/gR g [ɡ]; -[ɣ]- g; -g- [ɣ]; -g [x] g; -y/w-(rl) *ǵʰans- goose, OHG gans haṁsáḥ khḗn (h)ānser žąsìs *gʰ gh; hE [ɦ]; g..Ch; jE..Ch g; žE [ʒ]; dzE' g *gʷʰ ph; thE; kh(u); p..Ch; tE..Ch; k(u)..Ch f-; g / -u- [w]; ngu [ɡʷ] g; b-; -w-; ngw g; b-; -w- *sneigʷʰ- snow sneha- nípha nivis sniẽgas *gʷʰerm-  ??warm gharmáḥ thermós formus Latv. gar̂me *s s h-; -s; s(T); -Ø-; [¯](R) s; -r- s [s]; -[h]- s; `-z- s; `-r- *septḿ̥ seven saptá heptá septem septynì ṣruki- [ʂ] xruki- [x] šruki- [ʃ] *h₂eusōs "dawn" east uṣā́ḥ āṓs aurōra aušra *m m m [m]; -[w̃]- m *mūs mouse mū́ṣ- mũs mūs OCS myšĭ *-m -m -˛ [˜] -n -m -n -Ø *ḱm̥tóm hund(red) śatám (he)katón centum OPrus simtan *n n n; -˛ [˜] n *nokʷt- night nákt- núkt- noct- naktis *l r (dial. l) l *leuk- light rócate leukós lūx laũkas *r r *h₁reudʰ- red rudhirá- eruthrós ruber raũdas *i̯ y [j] j [j] z [zd > dz > z] / h; -Ø- i [j]; -Ø- Ø j y *yugóm yoke yugám zugón iugum jùngas *u̯ v [ʋ] v v [ʋ] w > h / Ø u [w > v] f; -Ø- w *h₂weh₁n̥to- wind vā́taḥ áenta ventus vėtra PIE Skr. O.C.S. Lith. Greek Latin Old Irish Gothic English Notes: C- At the beginning of a word. -C- Between vowels. -C At the end of a word. `-C- Following an unstressed vowel (Verner's law). -C-(rl) Between vowels, or between a vowel and r, l (on either side). CT Before a (PIE) stop (p, t, k). CT− After a (PIE) obstruent (p, t, k, etc.; s). C(T) Before or after an obstruent (p, t, k, etc.; s). CH Before an original laryngeal. CE Before a (PIE) front vowel (i, e). CE' Before secondary (post-PIE) front-vowels. Ce Before e. C(u) Before or after a (PIE) u (boukólos rule). C(O) Before or after a (PIE) o, u (boukólos rule). Cn− After n. CR Before a sonorant (r, l, m, n). C(R) Before or after a sonorant (r, l, m, n). C(r),l,u− Before r, l or after r, u. Cruki− After r, u, k, i (Ruki sound law). C..Ch Before an aspirated consonant in the next syllable (Grassmann's law, a.k.a. dissimilation of aspirates). CE..Ch Before a (PIE) front vowel (i, e) as well as before an aspirated consonant in the next syllable (Grassmann's law, a.k.a. dissimilation of aspirates). C(u)..Ch Before or after a (PIE) u as well as before an aspirated consonant in the next syllable (Grassmann's law, a.k.a. dissimilation of aspirates). Comparison of conjugations[edit] The following table presents a comparison of conjugations of the thematic present indicative of the verbal root *bʰer- of the English verb to bear and its reflexes in various early attested IE languages and their modern descendants or relatives, showing that all languages had in the early stage an inflectional verb system. Proto-Indo-European (*bʰer- 'to carry') I (1st sg.) *bʰéroh₂ You (2nd sg.) *bʰéresi He/She/It (3rd sg.) *bʰéreti We (1st dual) *bʰérowos You (2nd dual) *bʰéreth₁es They (3rd dual) *bʰéretes We (1st pl.) *bʰéromos You (2nd pl.) *bʰérete They (3rd pl.) *bʰéronti Major subgroup Hellenic Indo-Iranian Italic Celtic Armenian Germanic Balto-Slavic Albanian Indo-Aryan Iranian Baltic Slavic Ancient representative Ancient Greek Vedic Sanskrit Avestan Latin Old Irish Classical Arm. Gothic Old Prussian Old Church Sl. Old Albanian I (1st sg.) phérō bhárāmi barā ferō biru; berim berem baíra /bɛra/ berǫ *berja You (2nd sg.) phéreis bhárasi barahi fers biri; berir beres baíris bereši He/She/It (3rd sg.) phérei bhárati baraiti fert berid berē baíriþ beretъ We (1st dual) — bhárāvas barāvahi — — — baíros berevě You (2nd dual) phéreton bhárathas — — — — baírats bereta They (3rd dual) phéreton bháratas baratō — — — — berete We (1st pl.) phéromen bhárāmas barāmahi ferimus bermai beremk` baíram beremъ You (2nd pl.) phérete bháratha baraϑa fertis beirthe berēk` baíriþ berete They (3rd pl.) phérousi bháranti barəṇti ferunt berait beren baírand berǫtъ Modern representative Modern Greek Hindustani Persian French Irish Armenian (Eastern; Western) German Lithuanian Czech Albanian I (1st sg.) férno (maiṃ) bharūṃ (man) {mi}baram (je) {con}fère beirim berum em; g'perem (ich) {ge}bäre beriu beru (unë) bie You (2nd sg.) férnis (tū) bhare (to) {mi}bari (tu) {con}fères beirir berum es; g'peres (du) {ge}bierst beri bereš (ti) bie He/She/It (3rd sg.) férni (vah) bhare (un) {mi}bare / (ān) {mi}barad (il) {con}fère beireann; %beiridh berum ē; g'perē (er)(sie)(es) {ge}biert beria bere (ai/ajo) bie We (1st dual) beriava You (2nd dual) beriata They (3rd dual) beria We (1st pl.) férnume (ham) bhareṃ (mā) {mi}barim (nous) {con}férons beirimid; beiream berum enk`; g'perenk` (wir) {ge}bären beriame berem(e) (ne) biem You (2nd pl.) férnete (tum) bharo (šomā) {mi}barid (vous) {con}férez beireann sibh; %beirthaoi berum ek`; g'perek` (ihr) {ge}bärt beriate berete (ju) bini They (3rd pl.) férnun (ve) bhareṃ (unā) / (ānān) {mi}barand (ils) {con}fèrent beirid berum en; g'peren (sie) {ge}bären beria berou (ata/ato) bien While similarities are still visible between the modern descendants and relatives of these ancient languages, the differences have increased over time. Some IE languages have moved from synthetic verb systems to largely periphrastic systems. The pronouns of periphrastic forms are in brackets when they appear. Some of these verbs have undergone a change in meaning as well. In Modern Irish beir usually only carries the meaning to bear in the sense of bearing a child; its common meanings are to catch, grab. The Hindi verb bharnā, the continuation of the Sanskrit verb, can have a variety of meanings, but the most common is "to fill". The forms given in the table, although etymologically derived from the present indicative, now have the meaning of subjunctive. The present indicative is conjugated periphrastically, using a participle (etymologically the Sanskrit present participle bharant-) and an auxiliary: maiṃ bhartā hūṃ, tū bhartā hai, vah bhartā hai, ham bharte haiṃ, tum bharte ho, ve bharte haiṃ (masculine forms). German is not directly descended from Gothic, but the Gothic forms are a close approximation of what the early West Germanic forms of c. 400 AD would have looked like. The cognate of Germanic beranan (English bear) survives in German only in the compound gebären, meaning "bear (a child)". The Latin verb ferre is irregular, and not a good representative of a normal thematic verb. In French, other verbs now mean "to carry" and ferre only survives in compounds such as souffrir "to suffer" (from Latin sub- and ferre) and conférer "to confer" (from Latin "con-" and "ferre"). In Modern Greek, phero φέρω (modern transliteration fero) "to bear" is still used but only in specific contexts and is most common in such compounds as αναφέρω, διαφέρω, εισφέρω, εκφέρω, καταφέρω, προφέρω, προαναφέρω, προσφέρω etc. The form that is (very) common today is pherno φέρνω (modern transliteration ferno) meaning "to bring". Additionally, the perfective form of pherno (used for the subjunctive voice and also for the future tense) is also phero. In Modern Russian брать (brat') carries the meaning to take. Бремя (br'em'a) means burden, as something heavy to bear, and derivative беременность (b'er'em'ennost') means pregnancy. Comparison of cognates[edit] Main article: Indo-European vocabulary See also: Proto-Indo-European numerals and List of numbers in various languages Present distribution of Indo-European languages[edit] Countries where an Indo-European language is:   a primary de facto national or official language   a secondary official language   officially recognized The approximate present-day distribution of Indo-European languages within the Americas by country: Romance:   Spanish   Portuguese–Galician   French Germanic:   English   Dutch Today, Indo-European languages are spoken by almost 3 billion native speakers across all inhabited continents,[50] the largest number by far for any recognised language family. Of the 20 languages with the largest numbers of native speakers according to Ethnologue, 11 are Indo-European: Spanish, English, Hindi, Portuguese, Bengali, Russian, Punjabi, German, French, Marathi, and Urdu, accounting for over 1.7 billion native speakers.[51] Following centuries of European colonization, many modern countries now have an Indo-European language as their official language. See also[edit] Afroasiatic languages Grammatical conjugation The Horse, The Wheel and Language (book) Indo-European copula Indo-European sound laws Indo-European studies Indo-European vocabulary Indo-Semitic languages Language family Languages of Asia Languages of Europe Languages of India List of Indo-European languages Proto-Indo-European root Proto-Indo-European religion References[edit] ^ Nordhoff, Sebastian; Hammarström, Harald; Forkel, Robert; Haspelmath, Martin, eds. (2013). "Indo-European". Glottolog. Leipzig: Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary Anthropology.  ^ "Ethnologue report for Indo-European". Ethnologue.com.  ^ a b c Auroux, Sylvain (2000). History of the Language Sciences. Berlin, New York: Walter de Gruyter. p. 1156. ISBN 3-11-016735-2.  ^ M. V. Lomonosov (drafts for Russian Grammar, published 1755). In: Complete Edition, Moscow, 1952, vol. 7, pp. 652–659: Представимъ долготу времени, которою сіи языки раздѣлились. ... Польской и россійской языкъ коль давно раздѣлились! Подумай же, когда курляндской! Подумай же, когда латинской, греч., нѣм., росс. О глубокая древность! [Imagine the depth of time when these languages separated! ... Polish and Russian separated so long ago! Now think how long ago [this happened to] Kurlandic! Think when [this happened to] Latin, Greek, German, and Russian! Oh, great antiquity!] ^ "Indo-European Practice and Historical Methodology (cited on pp. 14-15)." (PDF). Retrieved 2010-08-07.  ^ Roger Blench Archaeology and Language: methods and issues at the Wayback Machine (archived May 17, 2006). In: A Companion To Archaeology. J. Bintliff ed. 52-74. Oxford: Basil Blackwell, 2004. (He erroneously included Egyptian, Japanese, and Chinese in the Indo-European languages, while omitting Hindi.)[dead link] ^ Robinson, Andrew (2007). The Last Man Who Knew Everything: Thomas Young, the Anonymous Genius who Proved Newton Wrong and Deciphered the Rosetta Stone, among Other Surprising Feats. Penguin. ISBN 0-13-134304-1.  ^ In London Quarterly Review X/2 1813.; cf. Szemerényi 1999:12, footnote 6 ^ a b c d e f g h i j k Anthony 2007, p. 100. ^ http://www.leidenuniv.nl/en/researcharchive/index.php3-c=178.htm ^ http://oi.uchicago.edu/pdf/ar/61-70/65-66/65-66_CHD.pdf ^ such as Schleicher 1861, Szemerényi 1957, Collinge 1985, and Beekes 1995 ^ "Tablet Discovery Pushes Earliest European Writing Back 150 Years".  ^ "Indian History". ISBN 9788184245684.  ^ http://www.ancient.eu.com/Mitanni/ ^ Of the Albanian Language. William Martin Leake, London, 1814. ^ "The Thracian language". The Linguist List. Retrieved 2008-01-27. An ancient language of Southern Balkans, belonging to the Satem group of Indo-European. This language is the most likely ancestor of modern Albanian (which is also a Satem language), though the evidence is scanty. 1st Millennium BC – 500 AD.  ^ Michel Lejeune (1974), Manuel de la langue vénète. Heidelberg: Indogermanische Bibliothek, Lehr- und Handbücher. ^ Julius Pokorny (1959), Indogermanisches Etymologisches Wörterbuch. Publisher Bern. ^ Kruta, Venceslas (1991). The Celts. Thames and Hudson. p. 54.  ^ Fine, John (1985). The ancient Greeks: a critical history. Harvard University Press. p. 72. ISBN 0674033140. "Most scholars now believe that the Sicans and Sicels, as well as the inhabitants of southern Italy, were basically of Illyrian stock superimposed on an aboriginal "Mediterranean" population." ^ François, Alexandre (2014), "Trees, Waves and Linkages: Models of Language Diversification" (PDF), in Bowern, Claire; Evans, Bethwyn, The Routledge Handbook of Historical Linguistics, London: Routledge, pp. 161–189, ISBN 978-0-41552-789-7 . ^ Blažek, Václav (2007). "From August Schleicher to Sergei Starostin: on the development of the tree-diagram models of the Indo-European languages". Journal of Indo-European Studies 35 (1–2): 82–109.  ^ Meillet, Antoine (1908). Les dialectes indo-européens. Paris: Honoré Champion.  ^ Bonfante, Giuliano (1931). I dialetti indoeuropei. Brescia: Paideia.  ^ Porzig, Walter (1954). Die Gliederung des indogermanischen Sprachgebiets. Heidelberg: Carl Winter Universitätsverlag.  ^ Nakhleh, Luay; Ringe, Don & Warnow, Tandy (2005). "Perfect Phylogenetic Networks: A New Methodology for Reconstructing the Evolutionary History of Natural Languages" (PDF). Language: Journal of the Linguistic Society of America 81 (2): 382–420. doi:10.1353/lan.2005.0078.  ^ Mallory, J.P., Adams, D.Q. (1997). Encyclopedia of Indo-European Culture. London: Fitzroy Dearborn.  CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list (link) ^ Porzig 1954, p. 39. ^ Fortson 2004, p. 247. ^ Watkins, Calvert (1966). "Italo-Celtic revisited". In Birnbaum, Henrik; Puhvel, Jaan. Ancient Indo-European dialects. Berkeley: University of California Press. pp. 29–50.  CS1 maint: Multiple names: editors list (link) ^ Weiss, Michael (2012). "Italo-Celtica: linguistic and cultural points of contact between Italic and Celtic". In Jamison, Stephanie W.; Melchert, H. Craig; Vine, Brent. Proceedings of the 23rd annual UCLA Indo-European conference. Bremen: Hempen. pp. 151–173.  CS1 maint: Multiple names: editors list (link) ^ Greppin, James (1996). "Review of The linguistic relationship between Armenian and Greek by James Clackson". Language 72 (4): 804–807. doi:10.2307/416105.  ^ Euler, Wolfram (1979). Indoiranisch-griechische Gemeinsamkeiten der Nominalbildung und deren indogermanische Grundlagen. Innsbruck: Institut für Sprachwissenschaft der Universität Innsbruck.  ^ Lubotsky - The Old Phrygian Areyastis-inscription, Kadmos 27, 9-26, 1988 ^ Kortlandt - The Thraco-Armenian consonant shift, Linguistique Balkanique 31, 71-74, 1988 ^ Renfrew, Colin (1987). Archaeology & Language. The Puzzle of the Indo-European Origins. London: Jonathan Cape. ISBN 0-224-02495-7.  ^ Encyclopædia Britannica, vol.22, Helen Hemingway Benton Publisher, Chicago, (15th ed.) 1981, p.593 ^ George S. Lane, Douglas Q. Adams, Britannica 15th edition 22:667, "The Tocharian problem" ^ The supposed autochthony of Hittites, the Indo-Hittite hypothesis and migration of agricultural "Indo-European" societies became intrinsically linked together by C. Renfrew. (Renfrew, C 2001a The Anatolian origins of Proto-Indo-European and the autochthony of the Hittites. In R. Drews ed., Greater Anatolia and the Indo-Hittite language. family: 36-63. Washington, DC: Institute for the Study of Man). ^ Britannica 15th edition, 22 p. 586 "Indo-European languages, The parent language, Laryngeal theory" - W.C.; p. 589, 593 "Anatolian languages" - Philo H.J. Houwink ten Cate, H. Craig Melchert and Theo P.J. van den Hout ^ Britannica 15th edition, 22 p.594, "Indo-Hittite hypothesis" ^ Holm, Hans J. (2008). "The Distribution of Data in Word Lists and its Impact on the Subgrouping of Languages". In Preisach, Christine; Burkhardt, Hans; Schmidt-Thieme, Lars; et al. Data Analysis, Machine Learning, and Applications. Proc. of the 31st Annual Conference of the German Classification Society (GfKl), University of Freiburg, March 7–9, 2007. Studies in Classification, Data Analysis, and Knowledge Organization. Heidelberg-Berlin: Springer-Verlag. ISBN 978-3-540-78239-1. The result is a partly new chain of separation for the main Indo-European branches, which fits well to the grammatical facts, as well as to the geographical distribution of these branches. In particular it clearly demonstrates that the Anatolian languages did not part as first ones and thereby refutes the Indo-Hittite hypothesis.  ^ Britannica 15th edition, vol.22, 1981, p.588, 594 ^ "Frederik Kortlandt-The spread of the Indo-Europeans, 1989" (PDF). Retrieved 2010-08-07.  ^ a b Anthony 2007, p. 56-58. ^ Ringe 2006, p. 67. ^ "Indo-European Languages: Balto-Slavic Family". Utexas.edu. 2008-11-10. Retrieved 2010-08-07.  ^ Ancient Tablet Found: Oldest Readable Writing in Europe ^ "Ethnologue list of language families". Ethnologue.com. Retrieved 2010-08-07.  ^ "Ethnologue list of languages by number of speakers". Ethnologue.com. Retrieved 2010-08-07.  Sources[edit] Anthony, David W. (2007). The Horse, the Wheel, and Language: How Bronze-Age Riders from the Eurasian Steppes Shaped the Modern World. Princeton University Press. ISBN 0-691-05887-3.  Auroux, Sylvain (2000). History of the Language Sciences. Berlin: Walter de Gruyter. ISBN 3-11-016735-2.  Fortson, Benjamin W. (2004). Indo-European Language and Culture: An Introduction. Malden, Massachusetts: Blackwell. ISBN 1-4051-0315-9.  Brugmann, Karl (1886). Grundriss der Vergleichenden Grammatik der indogermanischen Sprachen (in German). Erster Band. Strassburg: Karl J. Trübner.  Houwink ten Cate, H. J.; Melchert, H. Craig & van den Hout, Theo P. J. (1981). "Indo-European languages, The parent language, Laryngeal theory". Encyclopædia Britannica 22 (15th ed.). Chicago: Helen Hemingway Benton.  Holm, Hans J. (2008). "The Distribution of Data in Word Lists and its Impact on the Subgrouping of Languages". In Preisach, Christine; Burkhardt, Hans; Schmidt-Thieme, Lars; et al. Data Analysis, Machine Learning, and Applications. Proceedings of the 31st Annual Conference of the German Classification Society (GfKl), University of Freiburg, March 7–9, 2007. Heidelberg-Berlin: Springer-Verlag. ISBN 978-3-540-78239-1.  Kortlandt, Frederik (1990). "The Spread of the Indo-Europeans" (PDF). Journal of Indo-European Studies 18 (1–2): 131–140.  Lubotsky, A. (1988). "The Old Phrygian Areyastis-inscription". Kadmos 27: 9–26.  Kortlandt, Frederik (1988). "The Thraco-Armenian consonant shift". Linguistique Balkanique 31: 71–74.  Lane, George S.; Adams, Douglas Q. (1981). "The Tocharian problem". Encyclopædia Britannica 22 (15th ed.). Chicago: Helen Hemingway Benton.  Renfrew, C. (2001). "The Anatolian origins of Proto-Indo-European and the autochthony of the Hittites". In Drews, R. Greater Anatolia and the Indo-Hittite language family. Washington, DC: Institute for the Study of Man. ISBN 0-941694-77-1.  Schleicher, August (1861). Compendium der vergleichenden Grammatik der indogermanischen Sprachen (in German). Weimar: Böhlau (reprinted by Minerva GmbH, Wissenschaftlicher Verlag). ISBN 3-8102-1071-4.  Szemerényi, Oswald; Jones, David; Jones, Irene (1999). Introduction to Indo-European Linguistics. Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-823870-3.  von Bradke, Peter (1890). Über Methode und Ergebnisse der arischen (indogermanischen) Alterthumswissenshaft (in German). Giessen: J. Ricker'che Buchhandlung.  Further reading[edit] Beekes, Robert S. P. (1995). Comparative Indo-European Linguistics. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.  Chakrabarti, Byomkes (1994). A comparative study of Santali and Bengali. Calcutta: K.P. Bagchi & Co. ISBN 81-7074-128-9.  Collinge, N. E. (1985). The Laws of Indo-European. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.  Mallory, J.P. (1989). In Search of the Indo-Europeans. London: Thames and Hudson. ISBN 0-500-27616-1.  Renfrew, Colin (1987). Archaeology & Language. The Puzzle of the Indo-European Origins. London: Jonathan Cape. ISBN 0-224-02495-7.  Meillet, Antoine. Esquisse d’une grammaire comparée de l’arménien classique, 1903. Ramat, Paolo; Ramat, Anna Giacalone (1998). The Indo-European languages. Routledge.  Schleicher, August, A Compendium of the Comparative Grammar of the Indo-European Languages (1861/62). Strazny, Philip; Trask, R.L., eds. (2000). Dictionary of Historical and Comparative Linguistics (1 ed.). Routledge. ISBN 978-1-57958-218-0.  Szemerényi, Oswald (1957). "The problem of Balto-Slav unity". Kratylos 2: 97–123.  Watkins, Calvert (2000). The American Heritage Dictionary of Indo-European Roots. Houghton Mifflin. ISBN 978-0-618-08250-6.  Remys, Edmund, General distinguishing features of various Indo-European languages and their relationship to Lithuanian. Berlin, New York: Indogermanische Forschungen, Vol. 112, 2007. P. Chantraine (1968), Dictionnaire étymologique de la langue grecque, Klincksieck, Paris. External links[edit] Databases[edit] Dyen, Isidore; Kruskal, Joseph; Black, Paul (1997). "Comparative Indo-European". wordgumbo. Retrieved 13 December 2009.  "Indo-European". LLOW Languages of the World. Retrieved 14 December 2009.  "Indo-European Documentation Center". Linguistics Research Center, University of Texas at Austin. 2009. Retrieved 14 December 2009.  Lewis, M. Paul, ed. (2009). "Language Family Trees: Indo-European". Ethnologue: Languages of the World, Online version (Sixteenth ed.). Dallas, Tex.: SIL International. . "Thesaurus Indogermanischer Text- und Sprachmaterialien: TITUS" (in German). TITUS, University of Frankfurt. 2003. Retrieved 13 December 2009.  "Indo-European Lexical Cognacy Database (IELex)". Max Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics, Nijmegen.  Lexica[edit] "Indo-European Etymological Dictionary (IEED)". Leiden, Netherlands: Department of Comparative Indo-European Linguistics, Leiden University. Retrieved 14 December 2009.  "Indo-European Roots Index". The American Heritage Dictionary of the English Language (Fourth ed.). Internet Archive: Wayback Machine. August 22, 2008 [2000]. Archived from the original on 1 October 2009. Retrieved 9 December 2009.  Köbler, Gerhard (2014). Indogermanisches Wörterbuch (in German) (5th ed.). Gerhard Köbler. Retrieved 29 March 2015.  Schalin, Johan (2009). "Lexicon of Early Indo-European Loanwords Preserved in Finnish". Johan Schalin. Retrieved 9 December 2009.  Wikimedia Commons has media related to Indo-European languages. Wikinews has related news: New research shows over 400 languages originated in Turkey v t e List of primary language families Africa Afroasiatic Austronesian Khoe Kx'a Niger–Congo Nilo-Saharan? Tuu Mande? Songhay? Ubangian? Isolates Bangime Hadza Jalaa Sandawe Kwadi? Laal? Sign languages Arab BANZSL French Lasima Tanzanian Others Europe and Asia Afroasiatic Ainu Austroasiatic Austronesian Chukotko-Kamchatkan Dravidian Eskimo–Aleut Great Andamanese Hmong–Mien Hurro-Urartian Indo-European Japonic Kartvelian Koreanic Mongolic Northeast Caucasian Northwest Caucasian Ongan Sino-Tibetan Tai–Kadai Tungusic Turkic Tyrsenian Uralic Yeniseian Yukaghir Dené–Yeniseian? Altaic? Austronesian–Ongan? Austro-Tai? Sino-Austronesian? Digaro? Kho-Bwa? Siangic? Miji? Isolates Basque Burushaski Elamite Hattic Kusunda Nihali Nivkh Sumerian Hruso? Miju? Puroik? Sign languages BANZSL French German Japanese Swedish Chinese Indo-Pakistani Arab Chiangmai–Bangkok Others New Guinea and the Pacific Amto–Musan Arafundi Austronesian Baining Border (Tami) Bulaka River Central Solomons Doso–Turumsa East Bird's Head – Sentani East Geelvink Bay Eastern Trans-Fly Fas Goilalan Kiwaian Kwomtari Lakes Plain Left May Lower Mamberamo Mairasi Mai Brat? Monumbo Namla–Tofanma Nimboran North Bougainville Pahoturi Pauwasi Piawi Ramu–Lower Sepik Senagi Sepik Skou South Bougainville Teberan Tor–Kwerba Torricelli Trans–New Guinea West Papuan Yam Yawa Yuat Trans-Fly–Bulaka River? Yele – West New Britain? Isolates Abinomn Busa Kaure Kol Kuot Porome Pyu Taiap Yalë Abun? Amberbaken? Dem? Hattam? Isirawa? Lepki? Kapori? Kosare? Massep? Murkim? Pawaia? Sulka? Waia? Sign languages Hawai'i Sign Language Others Australia Arnhem/Macro-Gunwinyguan Bunuban Darwin River Eastern Daly Eastern Tasmanian Garawan Iwaidjan Jarrakan Mirndi Northern Tasmanian Northeastern Tasmanian Nyulnyulan Pama–Nyungan Southern Daly Tangkic Wagaydyic Western Daly Western Tasmanian Worrorran Yangmanic (Wardaman) Isolates Giimbiyu Malak-Malak Marrgu Tiwi Wagiman North America Algic Alsea Caddoan Chimakuan Chinookan Chumashan Comecrudan Coosan Eskimo–Aleut Iroquoian Kalapuyan Keresan Maiduan Muskogean Na-Dene Palaihnihan Plateau Penutian Pomoan Salishan Shastan Siouan Tanoan Tsimshianic Utian Uto-Aztecan Wakashan Wintuan Yokutsan Yukian Yuman–Cochimí Dené–Yeniseian? Hokan? Penutian? Isolates Chimariko Haida Karuk Kutenai Siuslaw Takelma Timucua Waikuri Washo Yana Yuchi Zuni Sign languages Inuit (Inuiuuk) Plains Sign Talk Others Mesoamerica Chibchan Jicaquean Lencan Mayan Misumalpan Mixe–Zoque Oto-Manguean Tequistlatecan Totonacan Uto-Aztecan Xincan Totozoquean? Isolates Cuitlatec Huave Seri Tarascan/Purépecha Sign languages Plains Sign Talk Mayan Others South America Arawakan Arauan Araucanian Arutani–Sape Aymaran Barbacoan Bororoan Cahuapanan Cariban Catacaoan Chapacuran Charruan Chibchan Choco Chonan Guaicuruan Guajiboan Jê/Gê Harákmbut–Katukinan Jirajaran Jivaroan Kariri Katembri–Taruma Mascoian Matacoan Maxakalian Nadahup Nambikwaran Otomákoan Pano-Tacanan Peba–Yaguan Purian Quechuan Piaroa–Saliban Ticuna–Yuri Tiniguan Tucanoan Tupian Uru–Chipaya Witotoan Yabutian Yanomaman Zamucoan Zaparoan Chimuan? Esmeralda–Yaruro? Hibito–Cholón? Lule–Vilela? Macro-Jê? Tequiraca–Canichana? Isolates (extant in 2000) Aikanã? Alacalufan Andoque? Camsá Candoshi Chimane Chiquitano Cofán? Fulniô Guató Hodï/Joti Irantxe? Itonama Karajá Krenak Leco Maku-Auari of Roraima Movima Mura-Pirahã Nukak? Ofayé Puinave Rikbaktsa Huaorani/Waorani Trumai Urarina Warao Yamana Yuracaré See also Language isolates Unclassified languages Creoles Pidgins Mixed languages Artificial languages List of sign languages Families in bold are the largest. Families in italics have no living members. Authority control LCCN: sh85065703 GND: 4114006-0 SUDOC: 027236293 BNF: cb11932222t (data) NDL: 00564144 BNE: XX527449 Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Indo-European_languages&oldid=717995689" Categories: Indo-European Indo-European languages Hidden categories: All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from May 2011 CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list CS1 maint: Multiple names: editors list Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from October 2015 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from August 2015 Articles containing French-language text CS1 German-language sources (de) Commons category with local link same as on Wikidata Wikipedia articles with LCCN identifiers Wikipedia articles with GND identifiers Wikipedia articles with BNF identifiers Articles with inconsistent citation formats Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Article Talk Variants Views Read Edit View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Featured content Current events Random article Donate to Wikipedia Wikipedia store Interaction Help About Wikipedia Community portal Recent changes Contact page Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Cite this page Print/export Create a book Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Languages Afrikaans Alemannisch Ænglisc العربية Aragonés Armãneashti অসমীয়া Asturianu Avañe'ẽ Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه বাংলা Bân-lâm-gú Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца)‎ Български Boarisch བོད་ཡིག Bosanski Brezhoneg Català Чӑвашла Čeština Corsu Cymraeg Dansk Deitsch Deutsch Dolnoserbski Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Estremeñu Euskara فارسی Føroyskt Français Frysk Furlan Gaeilge Gaelg Gàidhlig Galego 贛語 客家語/Hak-kâ-ngî 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hornjoserbsce Hrvatski Ido Ilokano Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Ирон Íslenska Italiano עברית Basa Jawa ಕನ್ನಡ ქართული Қазақша Kernowek Kiswahili Kurdî Кыргызча Ladino Лезги Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Ligure Limburgs La .lojban. Lumbaart Magyar Македонски Malagasy മലയാളം Malti मराठी მარგალური مصرى Bahasa Melayu Монгол မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands Nedersaksies नेपाली नेपाल भाषा 日本語 Napulitano Нохчийн Nordfriisk Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Олык марий Oʻzbekcha/ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پنجابی Piemontèis Tok Pisin Plattdüütsch Polski Português Qırımtatarca Ripoarisch Română Romani Runa Simi Русский Sámegiella Scots Seeltersk Shqip Sicilianu සිංහල Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Soomaaliga کوردیی ناوەندی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் Татарча/tatarça తెలుగు ไทย Тоҷикӣ ᏣᎳᎩ Türkçe Українська اردو Vèneto Tiếng Việt 文言 West-Vlams Yorùbá 粵語 Zazaki Zeêuws Žemaitėška 中文 Edit links This page was last modified on 30 April 2016, at 23:07. Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view