Flag of the Republic of China - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Flag of the Republic of China From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia   (Redirected from Flag of Taiwan) Jump to: navigation, search This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (September 2008) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) Republic of China Names Blue Sky, White Sun, and a Wholly Red Earth, 青天白日滿地紅 Use Civil and state flag, national ensign Proportion 2:3 Adopted 1928 Design A red field with a navy blue canton bearing a white sun with 12 triangular rays. Designed by Lu Haodong and Sun Yat-sen This article contains Chinese text. Without proper rendering support, you may see question marks, boxes, or other symbols instead of Chinese characters. The Flag of the Republic of China (traditional Chinese: 中華民國國旗; simplified Chinese: 中华民国国旗; pinyin: Zhōnghuá Mínguó Guóqí) is red with a navy blue canton bearing a white sun with twelve triangular rays. In Chinese, the flag is commonly described as Blue Sky, White Sun, and a Wholly Red Earth (traditional Chinese: 青天白日滿地紅; simplified Chinese: 青天白日满地红; pinyin: Qīng Tiān, Bái Rì, Mǎn Dì Hóng) to reflect its attributes. It was first used in China by the Kuomintang (KMT, the Chinese Nationalist Party) in 1917 and was made the official flag of the Republic of China in 1928. It was enshrined in the 6th article of the Constitution of the Republic of China when it was promulgated in 1947. Since 1949, the flag is mostly used within Taiwan, Penghu, Kinmen, Matsu and other outlying islands where the Republic of China relocated after having lost the Chinese Civil War to the Communists. As of 2016[update] the Republic of China is usually known as Taiwan. Contents 1 History 2 Symbolism 3 Construction details 4 Uses 5 Similar flags 6 See also 7 References 8 External links History[edit] The "Blue Sky with a White Sun flag" was designed by Lu Haodong in 1895 and is still used as the naval jack of the Republic as well as the flag of the Kuomintang (KMT). The canton (upper corner on the hoist side) originated from the "Blue Sky with a White Sun flag" (Chinese: 青天白日旗; pinyin: qīng tiān bái rì qí) designed by Lu Haodong, a martyr of the Republican revolution. He presented his design to represent the revolutionary army at the inauguration of the Society for Regenerating China, an anti-Qing society in Hong Kong, on February 21, 1895. This design was later adopted as the KMT party flag and the Coat of Arms of the Republic of China. The "red Earth" portion was added by Sun Yat-sen in winter of 1906, bringing the flag to its modern form. According to George Yeo, the Foreign Minister of Singapore, in those days the Blue Sky with a White Sun flag was sewn in the Sun Yat Sen Villa or Wan Qing Yuan in Singapore by Teo Eng Hock and his wife.[1][2] During the Wuchang Uprising in 1911 that heralded the Republic, the various revolutionary armies had different flags. Lu Hao-tung's "Blue Sky with a White Sun" flag was used in the provinces of Guangdong, Guangxi, Yunnan, and Guizhou. In Wuhan, a flag with 18 yellow stars was used to represent the 18 administrative divisions at the time. In Shanghai and northern China, a "Five-Colored Flag" (Chinese: 五色旗; pinyin: wǔ sè qí) (Five Races Under One Union flag) was used of five horizontal stripes representing the five major nationalities of China: the Han (red), the Manchu (yellow), the Mongol (blue), the Hui (white), and the Tibetan (black). The Five-coloured flag was used as a national flag from the inception of the Republic in 1912 until the demise of the warlord government in 1928. When the government of the Republic of China was established on January 1, 1912, the "Five-Colored Flag" was selected by the provisional Senate as the national flag. The "18-Star Flag" was adopted by the army[3] and the modern flag was adopted as a naval ensign.[4] Sun Yat-sen, however, did not consider the five-colored flag appropriate, reasoning that horizontal order implied a hierarchy or class like that which existed during dynastic times. After President Yuan Shikai assumed dictatorial powers in 1913 by dissolving the National Assembly and outlawing the KMT, Sun Yat-sen established a government-in-exile in Tokyo and employed the modern flag as the national ROC flag. He continued using this design when the KMT established a rival government in Guangzhou in 1917. The modern flag was made the official national flag on December 17, 1928 after the successful Northern Expedition that toppled the Beijing government, though the Five-Colored Flag still continued to be used by locals in an unofficial capacity. One reason for this discrepancy in use was lingering regional biases held by officials and citizens of northern China, who favored the Five-Colored Flag, against southerners such as the Cantonese/Hakka Sun Yat-sen.[citation needed] The Flag of the Reorganized National Government of China was based on the Flag of the Republic of China During the Second Sino-Japanese War, the invading Japanese established a variety of puppet governments using several flag designs. The "Reform Government" established in March 1938 in Nanjing to consolidate the various puppet governments employed the Five-Colored Flag. When Wang Jingwei was slated to take over the Japanese-installed government in Nanjing in 1940, he demanded to use the modern flag as a means to challenge the authority of the Nationalist Government in Chongqing under Chiang Kai-shek and position himself as the rightful successor to Sun Yat-sen. However, the Japanese preferred the Five-Colored flag. As a compromise, the Japanese suggested adding a triangular yellow pennant on top with the slogan "Peace, Anti-Communism, National Construction" (和平反共建國, Hépíng fǎngòng jiàn guó) in black, but this was rejected by Wang. In the end, Wang and the Japanese agreed that the yellow banner was to be used outdoors only, until 1943 when the banner was abandoned, leaving two rival governments with the same flag, each claiming to be the legitimate Nationalist government of China.[5] The flag was specified in Article Six of the 1947 Constitution. After the Chinese Civil War in 1949, the government of Chiang Kai-shek relocated to the island of Taiwan and continued the Republic of China. On the mainland, the communist forces of Mao Zedong established the People's Republic of China and adopted their own national flag. On October 23, 1954, the National Emblem and National Flag of the Republic of China Act (Chinese: 中華民國國徽國旗法; pinyin: Zhōnghuá Mínguó guóhuī guóqífǎ) was promulgated by the Legislative Yuan to specify the size, measure, ratio, production, and management of the flag.[6] Symbolism[edit] In the "Blue Sky with a White Sun" flag of Lu Hao-tung, the twelve rays of the white Sun symbolize the twelve months and the twelve traditional shichen (時辰, shíchén), a traditional unit of time which corresponds to two modern hours. Sun Yat-sen added the "Red Earth" to the flag to signify the blood of the revolutionaries who sacrificed themselves in order to overthrow the Qing Dynasty and create the ROC. Together, the three colors of the flag correspond to the Three Principles of the People: Blue represents nationalism and liberty; White represents democracy and equality; and Red represents the people's livelihood and fraternity.[7] President Chiang Kai-shek proclaimed on the National Day in 1949, "As long as a national flag with Blue Sky, White Sun, and a Wholly Red Earth flies on the land of China, it symbolises the independence and liberty of the descendants of the Huang Emperor". The blue-and-white canton of the ROC flag is often used as the party flag of the KMT. The flag has developed a great deal of additional symbolism due to the unique and controversial political status of Taiwan. At one level, the flag represents a clear symbol that Taiwan is not governed by the same government as Mainland China, as this flag is different from the flag of the People's Republic of China (PRC). Meanwhile, because it was formerly used as the flag over all of China, the flag has become a symbol of continuity with the ideals of the Chinese nationalism and Chinese reunification movements, and has become a symbol of a connection both historical and current with mainland China. In addition, the flag is derived from the seal of the KMT, and the color of the field of the flag is associated with the KMT party colors. Some Chinese see the flag as an expression of Chinese nationalism and pride combined with simultaneous disapproval for the current communist regime. Additionally, the flag may symbolize identification with, and admiration for the political thoughts of Sun Yat-sen, and his Three Principles of the People. One irony is that given the association of the flag with Chinese nationalism in opposition to Taiwan independence, the ROC flag has found an unexpected ally in the People's Republic of China. The PRC has criticized Taiwan independence groups for wishing to change or abolish the ROC flag, and has implied that legal steps to do so would bring a strongly negative reaction from the PRC. However, the presence of the ROC flag in Taiwan also distinguishes the fact that Taiwan and ROC territorial islands elsewhere fall under jurisdiction of a government separate from that of mainland China, the People's Republic of China. The hoisting of the ROC flag is even advocated by the most extreme Taiwanese independence supporters, such as Taiwan Solidarity Union members when emphasizing the separate and independently governed systems and territories of the Republic of China and the People's Republic of China in mainland China. Construction details[edit] National flag construction sheet Design for the canton Chieh Shou Hall in the Presidential Building contains the flag and portrait of Sun Yat-sen which presidents face to take the oath of office. Pan-Blue supporters wave the ROC flag at a rally during the 2004 presidential election. Flags of the ROC, PRC, and U.S. can be seen flying atop adjacent buildings in San Francisco Chinatown. Most benevolent associations in San Francisco, including the Chinese Six Companies, continue to fly the ROC flag due to their close relations with the KMT. The specific designs of the flag are located in the "Law about the national flag and emblem of the Republic of China." The ratio of the flag is 2:3, with most of it being red. One-fourth of the flag is blue, which contains the 12 pointed sun. Each sun ray is 30 degrees, so the total sun rays will make up a complete 360 degree circle. Inside the sun, the blue ring is the diameter of the white sun divided by 15.[8] In later years, more specifics of the canton area (also used as the flag of the KMT), were codified into law. In the drawing released in "Law on the Party and National Flag Manufacturing and Methods" (黨旗國旗之製造及使用辦法), the sun was drawn in more specific detail and mathematical values were given to all elements in the flag. In the law, the canton still had a ratio of 2:3, but the math values given were 24x36 meters. The diameter of the sun with rays is 6⁄8 of height of the flag, so in this case, it will be 18. The diameter of the white sun without the sun rays is 1⁄4 of the width of the canton, so it is 9. The blue ring that is on top of this sun and part of the rays is 1⁄15 diameter of the white sun, so the size will be 0.6. The angle of the rays, 30 degrees, and the total number of rays have not changed.[9] The colors of the national flag are dark red, white and dark blue. The KMT party flag just uses white and dark blue and both flags are to be topped with a golden finial.[10] The law doesn't list any specific color processes, such as Pantone, to manufacturing or drawing the flag. Other publications, such as the Album des pavillons nationaux et des marques distinctives, have given approximations for Pantone colors. The dark blue color is Pantone 301c and the dark red is Pantone 186c.[11] Album des pavillons also gave the approximate CMYK colors for the flag; dark blue is 100-45-0-10 and dark red is 0-90-75-5.[11] Uses[edit] In the early years of the Republic, under the KMT's political tutelage, the flag shared the same prominence as the KMT party flag. A common wall display consisted of the KMT flag perched on the left and the ROC flag perched on the right, each tilted at an angle with a portrait of Father of the Nation Sun Yat-sen displayed in the center. For the summits held between the KMT and Communist Party during the Chinese Civil War, the ROC flag was displayed at an equal position to the flag of the Chinese Soviet Republic (Jiangxi Soviet). Later, the flag law specified a horizontal display of the flag with the portrait of Sun Yat-sen in a portion of the red field at the center position. This display can be found in numerous government offices in Taiwan and is that which the President and Vice President face to take the oath of office. The flag has a ubiquitous presence in Taiwan. The hoisting and lowering of the flag are ceremoniously accompanied by the National Banner Song while those present stand at attention to give a standard salute with the right hand, held flat, to the right eyebrow. Schoolchildren have traditionally been required to attend morning rallies where the flag is raised after a rendition of the National Anthem of the Republic of China. Before martial law was lifted in 1987 in Taiwan, it was required that all vehicles be halted when passing by a flag ceremony. The Chinese Taipei Olympic Committee flag is used in place of the flag of the Republic of China at the Olympic Games and in some sporting events. The ROC flag is not commonly seen at international gatherings in which the PRC participates due to pressure from the PRC over the political status of Taiwan and resulting minimal political influence of the ROC in such circles. Instead, the ROC is usually represented under a pseudonym (usually "Chinese Taipei") and in the case of Olympics, it flies its own flag, the Chinese Taipei flag. This is because the IOC recognises the PRC's position that the ROC is a defunct entity and that the ROC on Taiwan is illegitimate. The ban also effectively applies to spectators—during a Table Tennis final match at the 1996 Atlanta Olympics, police arrested a Taiwanese student for waving the ROC flag.[12] However, the symbolism of the flag began to shift in the early 21st century as there was a warming of relations between the pan-Blue coalition in Taiwan and the Communist Party of China on mainland China. The flag of the Republic of China has begun to symbolize the existence of a past and possibly future unified China, and as such the government of the PRC has made it clear that for Taiwan to change the flag would be a major provocation in favor of Taiwan independence. The ambiguity surrounding the flag was made apparent during the trip of Kuomintang Chairman Lien Chan to mainland China in April 2005, during which the flag was very prominently displayed at ceremonies honoring Sun Yat-Sen at which both KMT party officials and government officials from the PRC were in attendance. One place in Mainland China where the White Sun emblem is still prominently displayed in public is the ceiling mosaic within Sun Yat-sen Mausoleum in Nanjing. The use of the flag in Taiwan reflects the controversy behind its symbolism. Although supporters of Taiwan independence, such as former President Chen Shui-bian, will display and salute the flag on formal official state occasions, it is never seen at political rallies of the Democratic Progressive Party. This is not only because of its association with mainland China but also because the flag contains design elements of the KMT party flag. By contrast, the ROC flag is always extremely prominent at political rallies of the pan-Blue coalition. This difference extends to the colors seen at the rallies. Rallies of the pan-Blue coalition give prominence to the colors of the ROC flag, with very large amounts of blue and smaller amounts of red. Rallies of independence-leaning parties are filled with green, with no blue or red at all. Some supporters of Taiwan independence, including former president Lee Teng-hui, have called for the abandonment of the flag, and there are a number of alternate designs for a specifically Taiwanese flag. However, the prospects for this are not high given that changing the flag requires a constitutional amendment; that the current flag has a huge amount of support among pan-Blue supporters and grudging acceptance among moderate independence supporters; and because changing the flag might cause political tension with the PRC. During the 2004 ROC legislative elections, it was briefly suggested that if the pan-green coalition won the elections that it would force the KMT to change the party emblem to be different from the flag. This proposal generated a few days of controversy and was then quickly forgotten. Similar flags[edit] The flags that are similar to the flag of the Republic of China include :  Flag of Myanmar (Burma) (1974–2010)  Flag of Samoa  Red Ensign, the civil ensign of the United Kingdom Flag of the Vietnam Revolutionary League (1942–1946) Flag of the Far Eastern Republic (1920-1922) It has been reported that Taiwanese spectators have cheered for the Chinese Taipei national baseball team with the former flag of Myanmar at many international sport games, including the 2008 Olympics in Beijing, People's Republic of China, where public display of the flag of the Republic of China was barred by the PRC.[13][14] See also[edit] Taiwan portal This article contains Chinese text. Without proper rendering support, you may see question marks, boxes, or other symbols instead of Chinese characters. National Flag Anthem of the Republic of China Chinese Taipei Olympic flag Flag of the Qing Dynasty Flag of the People's Republic of China Flags of the Republic of China-Nanjing History of the Republic of China List of Chinese flags (listing both the PRC and ROC flags) List of Taiwanese flags (listing the ROC flags) Military of the Republic of China Politics of the Republic of China Proposed flags of Taiwan References[edit] ^ The Straits Times (printed edition), July 17, 2010, page A17, 'This is common ancestry' by Rachel Chang ^ Dr Sun & 1911 Revolution: Teo Eng Hock (1871 - 1957) ^ Yu-liang, Tai (1954-10-23). 中國歷代陸軍旗幟 (in Chinese). Retrieved 2008-12-26.  ^ Yu-liang, Tai (1954-10-23). 中國歷代海軍旗幟 (in Chinese). Retrieved 2007-12-11.  ^ Cheung, Andrew (1995). "Slogans, Symbols, and Legitimacy: The Case of Wang Jingwei's Nanjing Regime". Working paper. East Asian Working Paper Series on Language and Politics in Modern China. Archived from the original on 26 February 2008. Retrieved 24 July 2008.  ^ Yu-liang, Tai (1954-10-23). 中華民國國徽國旗法 (in Chinese). Retrieved 2008-12-26.  ^ Office of the President (2011). "National Flag". Republic of China (Taiwan). Retrieved 7 August 2011.  ^ 中華民國國徽國旗法 (in Chinese). 1954-10-23. Retrieved 2008-09-19.  ^ Yu-liang, Tai (2006-05-19). 黨旗國旗之製造及使用辦法 (in Chinese). Retrieved 2008-09-19.  ^ Yu-liang, Tai (2006-05-19). 國旗黨旗製用升降辦法 (in Chinese). Retrieved 2008-09-19.  ^ a b du Payrat, Armand (2000). Album des pavillons nationaux et des marques distinctive. France: Service Hydrographique et Océanographique de la Marine. pp. TA2.1.  ^ "Taiwanese spectators arrested". Associated Press (The Washington Post). 1996-09-01.  ^ TVBS News - 日本爆烏龍！錯把緬甸國旗當我國旗, May 23, 2010 (Traditional Chinese) ^ NOW News - 沖繩車站介紹台灣，誤植緬甸國旗, May 23, 2010 (Traditional Chinese) External links[edit] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Flags of the Republic of China. Government Information Office, Republic of China Law of the National Emblem and National Flag of the Republic of China (Traditional Chinese) Republic of China at Flags of the World v t e Taiwan articles History Timeline of Taiwanese history Prehistory archaeological sites Dutch Formosa Spanish Formosa Kingdom of Tungning Taiwan under Qing rule Republic of Formosa Taiwan under Japanese rule After World War II Geography Cities Climate Earthquakes Endemic species / Protected species Hot springs Islands Mountains National parks Rivers Scenic areas Volcanoes Politics Domestic politics Administrative divisions Censorship Constitution Elections Human rights LGBT rights LGBT history Intelligence Law enforcement nationality Legislative Yuan (parliament) Military conscription President Political parties Propaganda Cross-Strait politics Political status of Taiwan Cross-Strait relations Free area of the Republic of China Legal status of Taiwan One Country on Each Side Special non-state-to-state relations Two Chinas Foreign relations Disputed issues Taiwanization / Desinicization Taiwanese nationalism / Chinese nationalism Taiwan independence / Cross-Strait Unification Economy Banks Central bank Companies Dollar (currency) Economic history Energy Electricity Mining Metropolitan areas Stock exchange Taiwan Miracle Telecommunications Transportation Taxation Uniform Invoice lottery Society Education history Healthcare Inventions and discoveries International rankings Public holidays Women Culture Cinema Cuisine Cultural history Gambling Glove puppetry Languages Literature Music Taiwanese opera Night markets Photography Religion Smoking Sports Tea Tourist attractions Communication Media television Demographics Taiwanese people Aborigines Han people Ethnic groups Symbols National Anthem Flag Flag Anthem Emblem Category Commons WikiProject v t e Flags of Asia Sovereign states Afghanistan Armenia Azerbaijan Bahrain Bangladesh Bhutan Brunei Cambodia China Cyprus East Timor (Timor-Leste) Egypt Georgia India Indonesia Iran Iraq Israel Japan Jordan Kazakhstan North Korea South Korea Kuwait Kyrgyzstan Laos Lebanon Malaysia Maldives Mongolia Myanmar Nepal Oman Pakistan Philippines Qatar Russia Saudi Arabia Singapore Sri Lanka Syria Tajikistan Thailand Turkey Turkmenistan United Arab Emirates Uzbekistan Vietnam Yemen States with limited recognition Abkhazia Nagorno-Karabakh Northern Cyprus Palestine South Ossetia Taiwan Dependencies and other territories British Indian Ocean Territory Christmas Island Cocos (Keeling) Islands Hong Kong Macau v t e National flags and coats of arms National flags Sovereign states Dependent territories Timeline National coats of arms Sovereign states Dependent territories Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Flag_of_the_Republic_of_China&oldid=717677824" Categories: 1928 introductions National flags Flags of the Republic of China Flags of unrecognized or largely unrecognized states Hidden categories: CS1 uses Chinese-language script (zh) CS1 Chinese-language sources (zh) Articles needing additional references from September 2008 All articles needing additional references Articles containing Chinese-language text Articles containing traditional Chinese-language text Articles containing simplified Chinese-language text Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2016 All articles containing potentially dated statements All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from August 2010 Commons category with local link same as on Wikidata Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Article Talk Variants Views Read Edit View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Featured content Current events Random article Donate to Wikipedia Wikipedia store Interaction Help About Wikipedia Community portal Recent changes Contact page Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Cite this page Print/export Create a book Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Languages አማርኛ العربية Беларуская Български Bosanski Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית Lietuvių Magyar Македонски Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Русский Scots Slovenčina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska ไทย Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt Yorùbá 粵語 中文 Edit links This page was last modified on 29 April 2016, at 02:50. Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view