Action (physics) - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Action (physics) From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to: navigation, search In physics, action is an attribute of the dynamics of a physical system. It is a mathematical functional which takes the trajectory, also called path or history, of the system as its argument and has a real number as its result. Generally, the action takes different values for different paths.[1] Action has the dimensions of [energy]·[time] or [momentum]·[length], and its SI unit is joule-second. Contents 1 Introduction 2 History 3 Mathematical definition 4 Action in classical physics (disambiguation) 4.1 Action (functional) 4.2 Abbreviated action (functional) 4.3 Hamilton's principal function 4.4 Hamilton's characteristic function 4.5 Other solutions of Hamilton–Jacobi equations 4.6 Action of a generalized coordinate 4.7 Action for a Hamiltonian flow 5 Euler–Lagrange equations for the action integral 5.1 Example: free particle in polar coordinates 6 The action principle 6.1 Classical fields 6.2 Conservation laws 6.3 Quantum mechanics and quantum field theory 6.4 Single relativistic particle 6.5 Modern extensions 7 See also 8 References 9 Sources and further reading 10 External links Introduction[edit] Empirical laws are frequently expressed as differential equations, which describe how physical quantities such as position and momentum change continuously with time. Given the initial and boundary conditions for the situation, the "solution" to these empirical equations is one or more functions which describe the behavior of the system, and are called equations of motion. Action is a part of an alternative approach to finding such equations of motion. Classical mechanics postulates that the path actually followed by a physical system is that for which the action is minimized, or more generally, is stationary. In other words, the action satisfies a variational principle: the principle of stationary action (see also below). The action is defined by an integral, and the classical equations of motion of a system can be derived by minimizing the value of that integral. This simple principle provides deep insights into physics, and is an important concept in modern theoretical physics. The equivalence of these two approaches is contained in Hamilton's principle, which states that the differential equations of motion for any physical system can be re-formulated as an equivalent integral equation. It applies not only to the classical mechanics of a single particle, but also to classical fields such as the electromagnetic and gravitational fields. Hamilton's principle has also been extended to quantum mechanics and quantum field theory—in particular path integral formulation makes use of the concept—where a physical system follows simultaneously all possible paths with probability amplitudes for each path being determined by the action for the path.[2] History[edit] Action was defined in several, now obsolete, ways during the development of the concept.[3] Gottfried Leibniz, Johann Bernoulli and Pierre Louis Maupertuis defined the action for light as the integral of its speed or inverse speed along its path length. Leonhard Euler (and, possibly, Leibniz) defined action for a material particle as the integral of the particle's speed along its path through space. Pierre Louis Maupertuis introduced several ad hoc and contradictory definitions of action within a single article, defining action as potential energy, as virtual kinetic energy, and as a hybrid that ensured conservation of momentum in collisions.[4] Mathematical definition[edit] Expressed in mathematical language, using the calculus of variations, the evolution of a physical system (i.e., how the system actually progresses from one state to another) corresponds to a stationary point (usually, a minimum) of the action. Several different definitions of 'the action' are in common use in physics.[3][5] The action is usually an integral over time. However, when the action pertains to fields, it may be integrated over spatial variables as well. In some cases, the action is integrated along the path followed by the physical system. The action is typically represented as an integral over time, taken along the path of the system between the initial time and the final time of the development of the system,[3] where the integrand L is called the Lagrangian. For the action integral to be well-defined the trajectory has to be bounded in time and space. Action has the dimensions of [energy]·[time], and its SI unit is joule-second, which is identical to the unit of angular momentum. Action in classical physics (disambiguation)[edit] In classical physics, the term "action" has a number of meanings. Action (functional)[edit] Most commonly, the term is used for a functional which takes a function of time and (for fields) space as input and returns a scalar.[6][7] In classical mechanics, the input function is the evolution q(t) of the system between two times t1 and t2, where q represent the generalized coordinates. The action is defined as the integral of the Lagrangian L for an input evolution between the two times where the endpoints of the evolution are fixed and defined as and . According to Hamilton's principle, the true evolution qtrue(t) is an evolution for which the action is stationary (a minimum, maximum, or a saddle point). This principle results in the equations of motion in Lagrangian mechanics. Abbreviated action (functional)[edit] Usually denoted as , this is also a functional. Here the input function is the path followed by the physical system without regard to its parameterization by time. For example, the path of a planetary orbit is an ellipse, and the path of a particle in a uniform gravitational field is a parabola; in both cases, the path does not depend on how fast the particle traverses the path. The abbreviated action is defined as the integral of the generalized momenta along a path in the generalized coordinates According to Maupertuis' principle, the true path is a path for which the abbreviated action is stationary. Hamilton's principal function[edit] Main article: Hamilton–Jacobi equation Hamilton's principal function is defined by the Hamilton–Jacobi equations (HJE), another alternative formulation of classical mechanics. This function S is related to the functional by fixing the initial time t1 and the initial endpoint q1 and allowing the upper limits t2 and the second endpoint q2 to vary; these variables are the arguments of the function S. In other words, the action function is the indefinite integral of the Lagrangian with respect to time. Hamilton's characteristic function[edit] When the total energy E is conserved, the Hamilton–Jacobi equation can be solved with the additive separation of variables , where the time independent function W(q1, q2 … qN) is called Hamilton's characteristic function. The physical significance of this function is understood by taking its total time derivative . This can be integrated to give , which is just the abbreviated action. Other solutions of Hamilton–Jacobi equations[edit] The Hamilton–Jacobi equations are often solved by additive separability; in some cases, the individual terms of the solution, e.g., Sk(qk), are also called an "action".[3] Action of a generalized coordinate[edit] This is a single variable Jk in the action-angle coordinates, defined by integrating a single generalized momentum around a closed path in phase space, corresponding to rotating or oscillating motion The variable Jk is called the "action" of the generalized coordinate qk; the corresponding canonical variable conjugate to Jk is its "angle" wk, for reasons described more fully under action-angle coordinates. The integration is only over a single variable qk and, therefore, unlike the integrated dot product in the abbreviated action integral above. The Jk variable equals the change in Sk(qk) as qk is varied around the closed path. For several physical systems of interest, Jk is either a constant or varies very slowly; hence, the variable Jk is often used in perturbation calculations and in determining adiabatic invariants. Action for a Hamiltonian flow[edit] See tautological one-form. Euler–Lagrange equations for the action integral[edit] As noted above, the requirement that the action integral be stationary under small perturbations of the evolution is equivalent to a set of differential equations (called the Euler–Lagrange equations) that may be determined using the calculus of variations. We illustrate this derivation here using only one coordinate, x; the extension to multiple coordinates is straightforward.[1][7] Adopting Hamilton's principle, we assume that the Lagrangian L (the integrand of the action integral) depends only on the coordinate x(t) and its time derivative dx(t)/dt, and may also depend explicitly on time. In that case, the action integral can be written where the initial and final times (t1 and t2) and the final and initial positions are specified in advance as and . Let xtrue(t) represent the true evolution that we seek, and let be a slightly perturbed version of it, albeit with the same endpoints, and . The difference between these two evolutions, which we will call , is infinitesimally small at all times At the endpoints, the difference vanishes, i.e., . Expanded to first order, the difference between the actions integrals for the two evolutions is Integration by parts of the last term, together with the boundary conditions , yields the equation The requirement that be stationary implies that the first-order change must be zero for any possible perturbation ε(t) about the true evolution, Principle of stationary action This can be true only if Euler–Lagrange equation The Euler–Lagrange equation is obeyed provided the functional derivative of the action integral is identically zero: . The quantity is called the conjugate momentum for the coordinate x. An important consequence of the Euler–Lagrange equations is that if L does not explicitly contain coordinate x, i.e. if , then is constant in time. In such cases, the coordinate x is called a cyclic coordinate, and its conjugate momentum is conserved. Example: free particle in polar coordinates[edit] Simple examples help to appreciate the use of the action principle via the Euler–Lagrangian equations. A free particle (mass m and velocity v) in Euclidean space moves in a straight line. Using the Euler–Lagrange equations, this can be shown in polar coordinates as follows. In the absence of a potential, the Lagrangian is simply equal to the kinetic energy in orthonormal (x,y) coordinates, where the dot represents differentiation with respect to the curve parameter (usually the time, t). In polar coordinates (r, φ) the kinetic energy and hence the Lagrangian becomes The radial r and φ components of the Euler–Lagrangian equations become, respectively The solution of these two equations is given by for a set of constants a, b, c, d determined by initial conditions. Thus, indeed, the solution is a straight line given in polar coordinates. The action principle[edit] Main article: principle of stationary action Classical fields[edit] See also: Einstein–Hilbert action The action principle can be extended to obtain the equations of motion for fields, such as the electromagnetic field or gravitational field. The Einstein equation utilizes the Einstein–Hilbert action as constrained by a variational principle. The trajectory (path in spacetime) of a body in a gravitational field can be found using the action principle. For a free falling body, this trajectory is a geodesic. Conservation laws[edit] Main article: Conservation laws Implications of symmetries in a physical situation can be found with the action principle, together with the Euler–Lagrange equations, which are derived from the action principle. An example is Noether's theorem, which states that to every continuous symmetry in a physical situation there corresponds a conservation law (and conversely). This deep connection requires that the action principle be assumed.[2] Quantum mechanics and quantum field theory[edit] Main articles: Quantum mechanics and quantum field theory In quantum mechanics, the system does not follow a single path whose action is stationary, but the behavior of the system depends on all permitted paths and the value of their action. The action corresponding to the various paths is used to calculate the path integral, that gives the probability amplitudes of the various outcomes. Although equivalent in classical mechanics with Newton's laws, the action principle is better suited for generalizations and plays an important role in modern physics. Indeed, this principle is one of the great generalizations in physical science. It is best understood within quantum mechanics. In particular, in Richard Feynman's path integral formulation of quantum mechanics, where it arises out of destructive interference of quantum amplitudes. Maxwell's equations can also be derived as conditions of stationary action. Single relativistic particle[edit] Main article: Theory of relativity When relativistic effects are significant, the action of a point particle of mass m travelling a world line C parametrized by the proper time is . If instead, the particle is parametrized by the coordinate time t of the particle and the coordinate time ranges from t1 to t2, then the action becomes where the Lagrangian is .[8] Modern extensions[edit] The action principle can be generalized still further. For example, the action need not be an integral because nonlocal actions are possible. The configuration space need not even be a functional space given certain features such as noncommutative geometry. However, a physical basis for these mathematical extensions remains to be established experimentally.[6] See also[edit] Calculus of variations Functional derivative Functional integral Hamiltonian mechanics Lagrangian Lagrangian mechanics Measure (physics) Noether's theorem Path integral formulation Planck's constant Principle of least action Quantum physics Entropy (the least Action Principle and the Principle of Maximum Probability or Entropy could be seen as analogous) References[edit] ^ a b McGraw Hill Encyclopaedia of Physics (2nd Edition), C.B. Parker, 1994, ISBN 0-07-051400-3 ^ a b Quantum Mechanics, E. Abers, Pearson Ed., Addison Wesley, Prentice Hall Inc, 2004, ISBN 978-0-13-146100-0 ^ a b c d Analytical Mechanics, L.N. Hand, J.D. Finch, Cambridge University Press, 2008, ISBN 978-0-521-57572-0 ^ Œuvres de Mr de Maupertuis (pre-1801 Imprint Collection at the Library of Congress). ^ Encyclopaedia of Physics (2nd Edition), R.G. Lerner, G.L. Trigg, VHC publishers, 1991, ISBN 3-527-26954-1 (Verlagsgesellschaft), ISBN 0-89573-752-3 (VHC Inc.) ^ a b The Road to Reality, Roger Penrose, Vintage books, 2007, ISBN 0-679-77631-1 ^ a b Classical Mechanics, T.W.B. Kibble, European Physics Series, McGraw-Hill (UK), 1973, ISBN 0-07-084018-0 ^ L.D. Landau and E.M. Lifshitz The Classical Theory of Fields Addison-Wesley 1971 sec 8.p.24-25 Sources and further reading[edit] For an annotated bibliography, see Edwin F. Taylor who lists, among other things, the following books The Cambridge Handbook of Physics Formulas, G. Woan, Cambridge University Press, 2010, ISBN 978-0-521-57507-2. Cornelius Lanczos, The Variational Principles of Mechanics (Dover Publications, New York, 1986). ISBN 0-486-65067-7. The reference most quoted by all those who explore this field. L. D. Landau and E. M. Lifshitz, Mechanics, Course of Theoretical Physics (Butterworth-Heinenann, 1976), 3rd ed., Vol. 1. ISBN 0-7506-2896-0. Begins with the principle of least action. Thomas A. Moore "Least-Action Principle" in Macmillan Encyclopedia of Physics (Simon & Schuster Macmillan, 1996), Volume 2, ISBN 0-02-897359-3, OCLC 35269891, pages 840 – 842. Gerald Jay Sussman and Jack Wisdom, Structure and Interpretation of Classical Mechanics (MIT Press, 2001). Begins with the principle of least action, uses modern mathematical notation, and checks the clarity and consistency of procedures by programming them in computer language. Dare A. Wells, Lagrangian Dynamics, Schaum's Outline Series (McGraw-Hill, 1967) ISBN 0-07-069258-0, A 350-page comprehensive "outline" of the subject. Robert Weinstock, Calculus of Variations, with Applications to Physics and Engineering (Dover Publications, 1974). ISBN 0-486-63069-2. An oldie but goodie, with the formalism carefully defined before use in physics and engineering. Wolfgang Yourgrau and Stanley Mandelstam, Variational Principles in Dynamics and Quantum Theory (Dover Publications, 1979). A nice treatment that does not avoid the philosophical implications of the theory and lauds the Feynman treatment of quantum mechanics that reduces to the principle of least action in the limit of large mass. Edwin F. Taylor's page External links[edit] Principle of least action interactive Excellent interactive explanation/webpage v t e Classical mechanics SI units Linear/translational quantities Angular/rotational quantities Dimensions — L L2 Dimensions — — — T time: t s absement: A m s T time: t s — distance: d, position: r, s, x, displacement m area: A m2 — angle: θ, angular displacement: θ rad solid angle: Ω rad2, sr T−1 frequency: f s−1, Hz speed: v, velocity: v m s−1 kinematic viscosity: ν, specific angular momentum: h m2 s−1 T−1 frequency: f s−1, Hz angular speed: ω, angular velocity: ω rad s−1 T−2 acceleration: a m s−2 T−2 angular acceleration: α rad s−2 T−3 jerk: j m s−3 T−3 angular jerk: ζ rad s−3 M mass: m kg ML2 moment of inertia: I kg m2 MT−1 momentum: p, impulse: J kg m s−1, N s action: 𝒮, actergy: ℵ kg m2 s−1, J s ML2T−1 angular momentum: L, angular impulse: ΔL kg m2 s−1 action: 𝒮, actergy: ℵ kg m2 s−1, J s MT−2 force: F, weight: Fg kg m s−2, N energy: E, work: W kg m2 s−2, J ML2T−2 torque: τ, moment: M kg m2 s−2, N m energy: E, work: W kg m2 s−2, J MT−3 yank: Y kg m s−3, N s−1 power: P kg m2 s−3, W ML2T−3 rotatum: P kg m2 s−3, N m s−1 power: P kg m2 s−3, W Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Action_(physics)&oldid=718257211" Categories: Lagrangian mechanics Hamiltonian mechanics Calculus of variations Dynamics (mechanics) Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Article Talk Variants Views Read Edit View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Featured content Current events Random article Donate to Wikipedia Wikipedia store Interaction Help About Wikipedia Community portal Recent changes Contact page Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Cite this page Print/export Create a book Download as PDF Printable version Languages Беларуская Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Español فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն Italiano עברית Lietuvių Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Polski Português Română Русский Slovenčina Slovenščina Suomi Svenska Татарча/tatarça Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links This page was last modified on 2 May 2016, at 13:17. Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view