Formal science - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Formal science From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to: navigation, search This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (July 2011) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) Part of a series on Science Formal Logic Mathematics Mathematical logic Mathematical statistics Theoretical computer science Physical Chemistry Acid-base Analytical Environmental Inorganic Nuclear Organic Physical Solid-state Supramolecular Sustainable ("green") Theoretical Astrochemistry Biochemistry Crystallography Food chemistry Geochemistry Materials science Molecular physics Photochemistry Radiochemistry Stereochemistry Surface science Physics Classical Modern Applied Experimental Theoretical Computational Atomic Condensed matter Mechanics (classical continuum fluid solid) Molecular Nuclear Particle Plasma Quantum field theory Quantum mechanics (introduction) Special relativity General relativity Rheology String theory Thermodynamics Earth sciences Climatology Ecology Edaphology Environmental science Geodesy Geography (physical) Geology Geomorphology Geophysics Glaciology Hydrology Limnology Meteorology Oceanography Paleoclimatology Paleoecology Palynology Pedology Volcanology Space science Astronomy Astrophysics Cosmology Galactic astronomy Planetary geology Planetary science Stellar astronomy Life Biology Anatomy Anthropology Astrobiology Biochemistry Biogeography Biological engineering Biophysics Behavioral neuroscience Biotechnology Botany Cell biology Conservation biology Cryobiology Developmental biology Ecology Ethnobiology Ethology Evolutionary biology (introduction) Genetics (introduction) Gerontology Immunology Limnology Marine biology Microbiology Molecular biology Neuroscience Paleontology Parasitology Physiology Radiobiology Soil biology Sociobiology Systematics Toxicology Zoology Social Anthropology Archaeology Criminology Demography Economics Geography (human) History International relations Law Linguistics Pedagogy Political science Psychology Science education Sociology Applied Engineering Aerospace Agricultural Biological Biomedical Chemical Civil Computer science / engineering Electrical Fire protection Genetic Industrial Mechanical Military Mining Nuclear Operations research Robotics Software Web Healthcare Medicine Veterinary Dentistry Midwifery Epidemiology Pharmacy Nursing Interdisciplinary Applied physics Artificial intelligence Bioethics Bioinformatics Biomedical engineering Biostatistics Cognitive science Complex systems Computational linguistics Cultural studies Cybernetics Environmental science Environmental social science Environmental studies Ethnic studies Evolutionary psychology Forestry Library science Mathematical / theoretical biology Mathematical physics Military science Network science Neural engineering Neuroscience Science studies Scientific modelling Semiotics Sociobiology Statistics Systems science Urban planning Web science Philosophy History Basic research Citizen science Fringe science Protoscience Pseudoscience Freedom Policy Funding Method Technoscience Outline Portal Category v t e Formal sciences are disciplines concerned with formal systems, such as logic, mathematics, statistics, theoretical computer science, information theory, game theory, systems theory, decision theory and portions of linguistics and economics. Whereas the natural sciences seek to characterize physical systems, the formal sciences are concerned with characterizing abstract structures described by sign systems. The formal sciences aid the natural sciences by providing information about the structures the latter use to describe the world, and what inferences may be made about them. Contents 1 History 2 Differences from other forms of science 3 See also 4 References 5 Further reading 6 External links 7 References History[edit] Formal sciences began before the formulation of scientific method, with the most ancient mathematical texts dating back to 1800 BC (Babylonian mathematics), 1600 BC (Egyptian mathematics) and 1000 BC (Indian mathematics). From then on different cultures such as the Indian, Greek and Islamic mathematicians made major contributions to mathematics, while the Chinese and Japanese, independently of more distant cultures, developed their own mathematical tradition. Besides mathematics, logic is another example of one of oldest subjects in the field of the formal sciences. As an explicit analysis of the methods of reasoning, logic received sustained development originally in three places : India from the 6th century BC, China in the 5th century BC, and Greece between the 4th century BC and the 1st century BC. The formally sophisticated treatment of modern logic descends from the Greek tradition, being informed from the transmission of Aristotelian logic, which was then further developed by Islamic logicians. The Indian tradition also continued into the early modern period. The native Chinese tradition did not survive beyond antiquity, though Indian logic was later adopted in medieval China. As a number of other disciplines of formal science rely heavily on mathematics, they did not exist until mathematics had developed into a relatively advanced level. Pierre de Fermat and Blaise Pascal (1654), and Christiaan Huygens (1657) started the earliest study of probability theory. In the early 1800s, Gauss and Laplace developed the mathematical theory of statistics, which also explained the use of statistics in insurance and governmental accounting. Mathematical statistics was recognized as a mathematical discipline in the early 20th century. In the mid-twentieth century, mathematics was broadened and enriched by the rise of new mathematical sciences and engineering disciplines such as operations research and systems engineering. These sciences benefited from basic research in electrical engineering and then by the development of electrical computing, which also stimulated information theory, numerical analysis (scientific computing), and theoretical computer science. Theoretical computer science also benefits from the discipline of mathematical logic, which included the theory of computation. Differences from other forms of science[edit] One reason why mathematics enjoys special esteem, above all other sciences, is that its laws are absolutely certain and indisputable, while those of other sciences are to some extent debatable and in constant danger of being overthrown by newly discovered facts. — Albert Einstein[1] As opposed to empirical sciences (natural and social), the formal sciences do not involve empirical procedures. They also do not presuppose knowledge of contingent fact, or describe the real world. In this sense, formal sciences are both logically and methodologically a priori, for their content and validity are independent of any empirical procedures. Although formal sciences are conceptual systems, lacking empirical content, this does not mean that they have no relation to the real world. But this relation is such that their formal statements hold in all possible conceivable worlds (see valid formula) – whereas, statements based on empirical theories, such as, say, general relativity or evolutionary biology, do not hold in all possible worlds, and may eventually turn out not to hold in this world as well. That is why formal sciences are applicable in all domains and useful in all empirical sciences. Because of their non-empirical nature, formal sciences are construed by outlining a set of axioms and definitions from which other statements (theorems) are deduced. In other words, theories in formal sciences contain no synthetic statements; all their statements are analytic.[2][3] See also[edit] Book: Formal science Rationalism Abstract structure Abstraction in mathematics Abstraction in computer science Formal grammar Formal language Formal method Formal system Mathematical model References[edit] ^ Albert Einstein (1923). "Geometry and Experience". Sidelights on relativity. Courier Dover Publications. p. 27.  Reprinted by Dover (2010), ISBN 978-0-486-24511-9. ^ Carnap, Rudolf (1938). "Logical Foundations of the Unity of Science". International Encyclopaedia of Unified Science I. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.  ^ Bill, Thompson (2007), "2.4 Formal Science and Applied Mathematics", The Nature of Statistical Evidence, Lecture Notes in Statistics 189 (1st ed.), Springer, p. 15  Further reading[edit] Mario Bunge (1985). Philosophy of Science and Technology. Springer. Mario Bunge (1998). Philosophy of Science. Rev. ed. of: Scientific research. Berlin, New York: Springer-Verlag, 1967. C. West Churchman (1940). Elements of Logic and Formal Science, J.B. Lippincott Co., New York. James Franklin (1994). The formal sciences discover the philosophers' stone. In: Studies in History and Philosophy of Science. Vol. 25, No. 4, pp. 513–533, 1994 Stephen Leacock (1906). Elements of Political Science. Houghton, Mifflin Co, 417 pp. Bernt P. Stigum (1990). Toward a Formal Science of Economics. MIT Press Marcus Tomalin (2006), Linguistics and the Formal Sciences. Cambridge University Press William L. Twining (1997). Law in Context: Enlarging a Discipline. 365 pp. Michael M. Nikoletseas (2014). "Parmenides: The World as Modus Cogitandi". ISBN 978-1492283584". External links[edit] Interdisciplinary conferences — Foundations of the Formal Sciences References[edit] Popper, Karl R. (2002) [1959]. The Logic of Scientific Discovery. New York, NY: Routledge Classics. ISBN 0-415-27844-9. OCLC 59377149.  Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Formal_science&oldid=716880997" Categories: Formal sciences Hidden categories: Articles needing additional references from July 2011 All articles needing additional references Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Article Talk Variants Views Read Edit View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Featured content Current events Random article Donate to Wikipedia Wikipedia store Interaction Help About Wikipedia Community portal Recent changes Contact page Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Cite this page Print/export Create a book Download as PDF Printable version Languages العربية Bân-lâm-gú Български Català Deutsch Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 हिन्दी Ido Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Íslenska ქართული Nederlands 日本語 Oʻzbekcha/ўзбекча Polski Português Русский Slovenčina کوردیی ناوەندی Српски / srpski Svenska ไทย Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Українська اردو Winaray 中文 Edit links This page was last modified on 24 April 2016, at 13:14. Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view