User talk:Bluezy - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia User talk:Bluezy From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to: navigation, search Hi Bluezy I just came back after a few weeks and saw that you had reverted the RADIUS intro back into its original state. There was (is) a whacking great request at the top of the page asking for a better intro to this topic. So I wrote a bit about how it relates to most people actually using this site - non-engineers etc. And no, it was not copied from another site - it was all my very own little piece of editorial. Not relevant to the topic you say? Matter of opinion. But I think the existing intro is now boring as ditch-water. If you want to revert something, why don't you add some value by making it better yourself? Cigsy —Preceding unsigned comment added by Cigsy (talk • contribs) 00:36, 3 August 2008 (UTC) Contents 1 Another Question 2 Another Question 3 Few questions 4 Another question 4.1 The 2nd question regarding this issue:= 5 And yet another question 6 Image:Alcatel 5020.jpg listed for deletion 7 Orphaned fair use image (Image:Alcatel 7750 SR12.jpg) 8 IMS apps 9 Your edit to Paging 10 3RR 11 Keep goin' 12 re: removal of edits 13 Thanks :-) 14 Thanks! 15 Turkish Armed Forces 16 Joshua Levy 17 What the hell 18 Unspecified source for Image:Alcatel_5020.jpg 19 OrionTheMetalhead 20 IMS 21 AfD nomination of Axis plans for invasion of the United States during WWII 22 Orphaned non-free media (Image:Alcatel 5020.jpg) 23 Advanced Telecommunications Computing Architecture 24 Speedy deletion of Template:ADSL standards 25 Aww... 26 uk, 27 The Hot Office 28 Hot Office Again 29 Fort Eben Emael 30 Your edit to the List of nicknames of pro wrestlers‎ article 31 Altered Speedy Deletion rationale: Anand thakkar 32 You are now a Reviewer 33 Message on talk page 34 Speedy deletion nomination of File:Tikal Temple1 2006 08 11.JPG 35 ArbCom elections are now open! 36 ArbCom elections are now open! 37 Disambiguation link notification for April 26 Another Question[edit] Hi - you keep removing our external link from DIAMETER page www.openAAA.org - we are offering an Open Source GPL Diameter implantation Why do you remove us ? It's the same as opendiameter and jdiameter that you approve of as external link and much more community friendly than CISCO which you have under external links. I hope you will enable us to be on the external links or supply us with some explanation Traffix Systems (real name behind openAAA.org and open3gpp.org) is a commercial supplier of a Diameter stacks and applications. The fact that they publish their code as opensource is no reason to include it in Wikipedia. Wikipedia is a not a directory service (see WP:NOT). OpenDiameter.org is inside because it serves as a reference implementation (although not a good one). A customer that wants to implement an application server is more than capable enough to look up the various stacks offered, whether opensource or not, and make their choice. And there's no link to Cisco software anyway, just a whitepaper explaining the difference between Radius and Diameter. --Bluezy 19:39, 28 July 2007 (UTC) Another Question[edit] You've remohved link to Linkbit Online Protocol Decoder from several pages. Why ? I consider this free resource extremely useful to community. Wiki is not a link farm and generally links are just ads and should be removed, but this link is exactly the opposite case. Mitra 9 Nov 2006 (UTC) --Bluezy 13:57, 10 November 2006 (UTC) Wikipedia is an encyclopedia, it's not a collection of links (as you say). Don't forget that Linkbit is a commercial company - it's still an ad ! It's not because it's free, that it should be included. And I don't agree that it's useful, especially not for the general public. SIP ... maybe. But decoding SIGTRAN, GSM, TCAP, ... ????? The public of developers that might find it useful is extremely limited. They don't need any help in finding this resource. PS : I am one of those developers actually, I works for the second biggest telecom supplier. Reply: --Mitra 10 Nov 2006 Well, we have to agree to disagree. We see statistic on our server which prove that people coming from wikipedia indeed use our decoder and come back many times over. BTW, SIP is a text based protocol and as such could be read without special tools, as opposed to SIGTRAN, GSM, TCAP etc. There are many developers in the world who still work with these protocols, and there messages couldn't not be easily deciphered without a tool. One example would be ASN.1 based protocols. Linkbit has the only _working_ tool on the web which allows decoding many of these protocols starting from different layers, and this is done freely without even asking for a registration, fully anonymously. Believe it or not, but we have people using our decoder from all major telecom manufacturers every day. And last, but not list. Why do you find our link more objectionable then links to commercial products which are plentiful on the pages in question? Can I draw your attention to the discussion on this same subject at [1] (which is my Talk page). That discussion actually references this-one. JanCeuleers 12:08, 26 November 2006 (UTC) Few questions[edit] Hi. You said, that you have some expirience with a real IMS system. I have an interest in IMS, and I want to understand an IMS concepts deeply. So, I have a questions, on what I hope you have an answer. Thanks. Which of the IMS nodes contains information about the user status. I mean - user location, user availability and other information that can change with a time. Is it HSS? About AS layer. Can AS application store extended data in the HSS? About AS layer. Is there any other wrappers over the SIP AS, like a OSA/Parlay and CAMEL (IM SSF)? What node is responsible for security rights? Can you advise a good book or other print material, related to this topic? Reply: --Bluezy 21:37, 31 July 2006 (UTC) - question 2: the HSS can be used to store data on behalve of the I-CSCF and S-CSCF (thru Cx and Dx interfaces) and also for other application server (using the sh interfaces) - question 1: user availability, etc ... is stored inside the HSS (a database). But a copy is also present in memory of the SCSCF that is assigned to the user, for fast access. Even if the SCSCF crashes, the data would still be safe. User location is not part of the core IMS, but it can be implemented in an AS. SIP itself doesn't have standardized headers for it (except P-Access-Network-Info). More accurate info can be found in cellular networks (GPS-coordinates), but must be found using other means (f.i. CAMEL). Sometimes, it's the AS that does it, but most often it's done by the HSS directly, for historical reasons. But the AS can retrieve it thru the SH interface. - question 3: it's not a wrapper over SIP, but yes, application servers can use other API's to do tasks that can't be done in SIP (like location info above). OSA/Parlay and CAMEL are standard, but there are others too. - question 4: IPSEC is terminated in the P-CSCF, under control of the S-CSCF (authentication is done in HSS) - question5: a good book is The 3G IP Multimedia Subsystem (IMS): Merging the Internet and the Cellular Worlds, by Gonzalo Camarillo, Miguel-Angel García-Martín Reply: --Alny Thanks for your answer. On your answer you are use a references to the term "interfaces". But I can't find the list of all possible IMS interfaces in the [IP_Multimedia_Subsystem|IMS] article. I think, it may be usefull to put a schema http://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/6/6f/Ims_architecture.JPG into this article? Another question[edit] Hello Bluezy. May I ask you one more question on IMS?. Question is: As I understand, there are 2 SIP's standards: IETF SIP and 3GPP SIP, that based on the IETF SIP. I can't find information, what is a main difference between them. And can I learn the SIP protocol using IETF RFC's or it is a bad way, because 3GPP use it's own extension? So, can you shortly describe this difference? Reply: --Bluezy 16:45, 19 September 2006 (UTC) 3GPP SIP is the same as IETF SIP, but with a few refinements. Most of them can be found in RFC 3455 (which adds a few extra headers), some other parts can be found in various parts of the 3GPP documents (mostly mandatory support for a few features). A standard off-the-shelve SIP-phone can't claim IMS compatibility, they'll have a bit of work to do (support for AKA, IPSEC, SIGCOMP, RFC 3455, etc ....). In my work the biggest difference that I've seen, is that a normal SIP-phone implements HTTP-Digest authentication (based on a password), while an IMS phone should support AKA-Digest (based on a USIM or ISIM card). The rest are more advanced features : an IMS phone might support presence and instant messaging, while they are often missing on a normal SIP phone. The 2nd question regarding this issue:=[edit] Hi Bluezy, As above, IMS uses SIP version which is a refinement of IETF SIP, and at this time they have difficulties to interoperate. So the problem here is that if I have an IMPU for my mobile phone at my office (called user@ims.com) and an I also have a (IETF) SIP ID called user@sip.com for that same mobile phone at home, subscribed to a IP-Telephony system. When I'm at home, I want to receive calls addressing to my office IMPU (i.e. user@ims.com) at my pure (IETF) SIP ID (i.e. user@sip.com) on the same mobile phone => I have to forward the calls between different identities (IMS and pure SIP), something that is called identity federation! So could you tell me the idea how to do this? Sotruot (talk) 10:22, 4 March 2008 (UTC) And yet another question[edit] So, it's me again. And I have another question related to IMS security and IMS authorization. Question is: Can IMS element, for example IMS Application Server (AS), trust to the FROM URI, from the SIP message header, that comes from a client? In other words - can user, or some client app, modify this URI in a client level, and send wrong SIP request? And if the answer on a first question is "AS can trust", than another question - Who is responsible for SIP messages authority check? Is it P-CSCF? Reply: --Bluezy 16:17, 20 October 2006 (UTC) The P-CSCF and the S-SCSCF work together to check for these case. See RFC 3325 : the P-asserted-identity header will be added by the P-CSCF, and shows the *real* identity of the user. The P-CSCF can be sure that the user is real, since it has an IPSEC connection to the client, or the transmission was running over an encrypted channel (in mobile networks). The S-CSCF and AS trust the P-CSCF in this matter. The S-CSCF can also (optionally) replace the From-header on the fly, if needed. And it can guard against modifications by a rogue AS for instance (it's always present in the path). But in general, the From-header should not be trusted at all. P-asserted-identity is also used when hiding your identity, in which case the From-header would be "sip:anonymous@anonymous.invalid". The header will be passed only to trusted network elements (including server from other networks), so it can it can be for lawful intercept and such (that's how the government can find out your identity, even when dialing without CLID) but will not reach the user on the other end. Image:Alcatel 5020.jpg listed for deletion[edit] Dear uploader: The media file you uploaded as Image:Alcatel 5020.jpg has been listed for speedy deletion because you selected a copyright license type implying some type of restricted use, such as for non-commercial use only, or for educational use only or for use on Wikipedia by permission. While it might seem reasonable to assume that such files can be freely used on Wikipedia, a non-profit website, this is in fact not the case. Please do not upload any more files with these restrictions on them, because content on Wikipedia needs to be compatible with the GNU Free Documentation License, which allows anyone to use it for any purpose, commercial or non-commercial. If you created this media file and want to use it on Wikipedia, you may re-upload it (or amend the image description if it has not yet been deleted) and use the license {{GFDL-self}} to license it under the GFDL, or {{cc-by-sa-2.5}} to license it under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike license, or use {{PD-self}} to release it into the public domain. If you did not create this media file but want to use it on Wikipedia, there are two ways to proceed. First, you may choose one of the fair use tags from this list if you believe one of those fair use rationales applies to this file. Second, you may want to contact the copyright holder and request that they make the media available under a free license. If you have any questions please ask at Wikipedia:Media copyright questions. Thank you. —Pilotguy (ptt) 03:25, 3 January 2007 (UTC) Ok, I guess it was a wrong license. Note the the popup to select one is really difficult to use. I reuploaded the image with the promotional tag. Note: I do work for Alcatel (and I'm a developer for the 5020 !), and the image is taken from our stack of images to use in press releases, user documentation, etc... It's also visible on the Inete, for instance http://www.alcatel.ru/products/fixed/all/phone-networks/a5020/ --Bluezy 22:32, 3 January 2007 (UTC) Orphaned fair use image (Image:Alcatel 7750 SR12.jpg)[edit] Thanks for uploading Image:Alcatel 7750 SR12.jpg. The image description page currently specifies that the image is non-free and may only be used on Wikipedia under a claim of fair use. However, the image is currently orphaned, meaning that it is not used in any articles on Wikipedia. If the image was previously in an article, please go to the article and see why it was removed. You may add it back if you think that that will be useful. However, please note that images for which a replacement could be created are not acceptable under fair use (see our fair use policy). If you have uploaded other unlicensed media, please check whether they're used in any articles or not. You can find a list of 'image' pages you have edited by clicking on the "my contributions" link (it is located at the very top of any Wikipedia page when you are logged in), and then selecting "Image" from the dropdown box. Note that any fair use images not used in any articles will be deleted after seven days, as described on criteria for speedy deletion. Thank you. This is an automated message from BJBot 22:03, 3 February 2007 (UTC) IMS apps[edit] Please could you have a look at Talk:IP Multimedia Subsystem? Thanks. JanCeuleers 14:46, 11 April 2007 (UTC) Your edit to Paging[edit] Is there a reason that the link to computer should not be in that sentence? ~EnviroboyTalkContribs - 22:29, 22 April 2007 (UTC) That's not what I was reverting. I reverted the entire paragraph for the vandalism, but TW got confused. Mid-air collision? --Bluezy 22:34, 22 April 2007 (UTC) Oh. That's the third time that has happened. Glad we got it cleared up. ~EnviroboyTalkContribs - 22:42, 22 April 2007 (UTC) 3RR[edit] You currently appear to be engaged in an edit war according to the reverts you have made on User talk:74.109.26.185. Note that the three-revert rule prohibits making more than three reversions in a content dispute within a 24 hour period. Additionally, users who perform a large number of reversions in content disputes may be blocked for edit warring, even if they do not technically violate the three-revert rule. If you continue, you may be blocked from editing. Please do not repeatedly revert edits, but use the talk page to work towards wording and content which gains a consensus among editors. Thank you. -Amatulic 20:29, 23 April 2007 (UTC) Keep goin'[edit] Revert that guy, 87.101.240.7, or I'll violate the 3rr. --Pupster21 Talk To Me 12:09, 4 May 2007 (UTC) Note to self: see history of Michael Bloomberg re: removal of edits[edit] The last thing on my mind was spamming or providing inappropriate content. But you have to agree that it does not appear to be a very consistent application of publishing rules that en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Global_warming lists and links close to 100 articles mostly scientific in nature (from which i took the specific type of referencing via REF tags), and on the Google Earth page it seems to be considered spam. Or why a free academic article raises concerns while various links to pages that include advertising in the reference section seem to be OK. By the way, there is also a broken link on the page, but I will refrain from further editing (earth.google.com/coverage/coverage_list.pdf). Ecoresearch 19:17, 8 May 2007 (UTC) Thanks :-)[edit] ... for reverting the vandalism to my userpage! Mentality 13:43, 9 May 2007 (UTC) Thanks![edit] Thanks for reverting the vandalism on my userpage today. Chriswiki 15:37, 16 May 2007 (UTC) Turkish Armed Forces[edit] Thanks for your help on this page! I'm not sure what to do with this debate, as Flavius seems pretty entrenched. Just an article to keep our eyes on for a time... Hiberniantears 21:05, 21 May 2007 (UTC) Joshua Levy[edit] I am Joshua Levy so i guess i can do whatever i want to my page. come on man. dont be so uptight. Reply: that's what a USER PAGE is for, not an article. --Bluezy 15:54, 29 May 2007 (UTC) What the hell[edit] Why did you revert my edits? What was wrong with them? --Msiladnav etaerc I 10:03, 4 July 2007 (UTC) Because you vandalized the German New Guinea article. Just look at the changes : - Colony of North Korea - changed the flags of the Treaty of Versailles members - common languages : Russian (official), Swedish, Welsh, Uzbek - nonsense text about a land full of rabbits --Bluezy 10:10, 4 July 2007 (UTC) You just did a second time, I'm reporting you. --Bluezy 10:12, 4 July 2007 (UTC) Unspecified source for Image:Alcatel_5020.jpg[edit] Thanks for uploading Image:Alcatel_5020.jpg. I noticed that the file's description page currently doesn't specify who created the content, so the copyright status is unclear. If you did not create this file yourself, then you will need to specify the owner of the copyright. If you obtained it from a website, then a link to the website from which it was taken, together with a restatement of that website's terms of use of its content, is usually sufficient information. However, if the copyright holder is different from the website's publisher, then their copyright should also be acknowledged. As well as adding the source, please add a proper copyright licensing tag if the file doesn't have one already. If you created/took the picture, audio, or video then the {{GFDL-self}} tag can be used to release it under the GFDL. If you believe the media meets the criteria at Wikipedia:Fair use, use a tag such as {{non-free fair use in|article name}} or one of the other tags listed at Wikipedia:Image copyright tags#Fair use. See Wikipedia:Image copyright tags for the full list of copyright tags that you can use. If you have uploaded other files, consider checking that you have specified their source and tagged them, too. You can find a list of files you have uploaded by following this link. Unsourced and untagged images may be deleted one week after they have been tagged, as described on criteria for speedy deletion. If the image is copyrighted under a non-free license (per Wikipedia:Fair use) then the image will be deleted 48 hours after 10:11, 9 July 2007 (UTC). If you have any questions please ask them at the Media copyright questions page. Thank you. MER-C 10:11, 9 July 2007 (UTC) OrionTheMetalhead[edit] Actually, you didn't have to revert because he can blank it if he wants. Cheers,JetLover (Report a mistake) 22:04, 13 September 2007 (UTC) IMS[edit] Wrt your insistence on your Early IMS sentence on the IMS page. At a logical level, anyone can create an implementation and call it whatever they want, even for IMS. The wording in the paragraph at the introduction *already* says that "it is not clear how much of IMS will be deployed" - and caters for the fact people will implement or deploy what they want. Ipv4 is a IMS capability so people are fully entitled to implement it! The issue that I have with what you are doing is that over several versions of what you are writing you are implying that "early ims" is a particular beast. Most vendors are putting out boxes that have things missing in them ... are they this formal early IMS you talk about? With MMS, there were teething issues and problems and people talked about early mms systems these had interoperability issues and did not implement many features - and still today many features are not implemented. If someone "deploys" Ipv6 and full security but leaves out other logical entities are they deploying "early ims"? How is it different to "pre-ims"? Bottom line, in 3GPP when we refer to "early ims" (actually rarely now) we have a particular context and what you say here is misleading general readers. If you want, we can talk at the next 3GPP meeting about this. —Preceding unsigned comment added by 194.72.92.36 (talk) 11:31, 14 September 2007 (UTC) PS: I stumbled acroos your comment on the proxy page. So I repeat my comment here "Oh dear, I can now see that you are not actually personally involved in standardisation. Read 23.221 carefully it talks about "Early IMS implementations" and have a chat with your standards guys ask them when "early" is no longer "early" ;o) A hint ... how many years before IPv6 becomes prevalent?! Any how this is an aside and I repeat 3GPP does not define an Early IMS - it makes no logical sense to do so and your comment on the page is misleading the general reader. If 3GPP tried to do this there would be an uproar, already there are problems and issues with IMS going in different directions and companies are trying to rein this in ...." Wikipedia is not a 3GPP forum. Early IMS and Full IMS are not defined at all by 3GPP. The only references are in those TS and TR documents, where they're basically only concerned with IPv4/IPv6 and the security issues. Ofcourse, there will be IMS networks that only use IPv4, and still claim to be "full IMS" or "IMS compliant" or whatever. In fact, I don't really see any IPv6 implementation in the near future, at least not for the networks that I know. What's more important is what the different releases are, and that you can claim that your device is R& compliant. There might be a few things missing like Ipv6 support, but that's less important. What's important is that vendors have to decide if they're going to support IPv4, IPv6 or both. Yes, Virginia, I expect that most be will be stuck in IPv4 mode. That used to be called "early IMS" in a few documents (when they expected that it was only a transition phase), but most networks will stay in that mode. But since "early" and "full" are never really defined, you can't claim which network is "fuller" than the other. Who cares, that's just marketing mumbo-jumbo. Just install what the customer really wants. But as long as 3GPP doesn't write any definitions, we have to use the ones with are *currently* published. Even if we both know that it won't be like that in the future. PS : I'm never at 3GPP meetings. Talk to Leonardo Finizola if you know him. --Bluezy 10:03, 15 September 2007 (UTC) AfD nomination of Axis plans for invasion of the United States during WWII[edit] An article that you have been involved in editing, Axis plans for invasion of the United States during WWII, has been listed for deletion. If you are interested in the deletion discussion, please participate by adding your comments at Wikipedia:Articles for deletion/Axis plans for invasion of the United States during WWII. Thank you. Orphaned non-free media (Image:Alcatel 5020.jpg)[edit] Thanks for uploading Image:Alcatel 5020.jpg. The media description page currently specifies that it is non-free and may only be used on Wikipedia under a claim of fair use. However, it is currently orphaned, meaning that it is not used in any articles on Wikipedia. If the media was previously in an article, please go to the article and see why it was removed. You may add it back if you think that that will be useful. However, please note that media for which a replacement could be created are not acceptable for use on Wikipedia (see our policy for non-free media). If you have uploaded other unlicensed media, please check whether they're used in any articles or not. You can find a list of 'image' pages you have edited by clicking on the "my contributions" link (it is located at the very top of any Wikipedia page when you are logged in), and then selecting "Image" from the dropdown box. Note that all non-free media not used in any articles will be deleted after seven days, as described on criteria for speedy deletion. Thank you. βcommand 22:00, 11 October 2007 (UTC) Advanced Telecommunications Computing Architecture[edit] How do I stop 62.90.163.113 from undoing my work? I made significant contributions to this article and posted the original pictures. 62.90.163.113 keeps replacing the original pictures with pictures from his company, ASIS. --Sun-collector 18:17, 4 February 2008 (UTC) Speedy deletion of Template:ADSL standards[edit] A tag has been placed on Template:ADSL standards requesting that it be speedily deleted from Wikipedia. This has been done under section T3 of the criteria for speedy deletion, because it is a deprecated or orphaned template. After seven days, if it is still unused and the speedy deletion tag has not been removed, the template will be deleted. If the template is intended to be substituted, please feel free to remove the speedy deletion tag and please consider putting a note on the template's page indicating that it is substituted so as to avoid any future mistakes (<noinclude>{{transclusionless}}</noinclude>). Thanks. --MZMcBride (talk) 02:41, 3 March 2008 (UTC) Aww...[edit] Why did you have to remove my edit for Xbox? Didn't you think it was funny? :( —Preceding unsigned comment added by 121.220.23.208 (talk) 09:17, 10 May 2008 (UTC) uk,[edit] tf,lyf,lfy —Preceding unsigned comment added by 124.180.41.53 (talk) 10:22, 10 May 2008 (UTC) The Hot Office[edit] Hi, i'm working for The Hot Office, and am trying to create an article on it, but its not acceptable for some reason? could you please let me know what i've done wrong? Thanks —Preceding unsigned comment added by Rowland Reeves (talk • contribs) 11:06, 23 June 2008 (UTC) Hot Office Again[edit] Ok, i'll remove the "only truly flexible office bit", and i will clearly state that it is based in the uk... will this then be acceptable? Also, is it allowed to put prices up? Thanks —Preceding unsigned comment added by Rowland Reeves (talk • contribs) 11:34, 23 June 2008 (UTC) Fort Eben Emael[edit] Hi there. You placed a merge tag on Fort Eben-Emael linking to Battle of Fort Eben-Emael and suggesting it be merged there, but you didn't start any discussion on the relevant talkpage. I haven't used tags like that before, but do you need to start a discussion on the talkpage for the Battle? Cheers, Skinny87 (talk) 10:55, 30 September 2008 (UTC) Your edit to the List of nicknames of pro wrestlers‎ article[edit] I think you may have erred in reverting this perceived vandalism as page authors ARE allowed to blank them and it could then have been speedily deleted under the WP:CSD#G7 criteria if left blank. ArcAngel (talk) 04:27, 13 October 2009 (UTC) Altered Speedy Deletion rationale: Anand thakkar[edit] Hello Bluezy, and thanks for your work patrolling new changes. I am just informing you that I have deleted a page you tagged (Anand thakkar) under a criterion different from the one your provided, which was inappropriate or incorrect. CSD criteria are narrow and specific to protect the encyclopedia, and the process is more effective if the correct deletion rationale is supplied. Consider reviewing the criteria for speedy deletion. If you have any questions or problems, please let me know. Thanks again! decltype (talk) 10:03, 27 November 2009 (UTC) You are now a Reviewer[edit] Hello. Your account has been granted the "reviewer" userright, allowing you to review other users' edits on certain flagged pages. Pending changes, also known as flagged protection, is currently undergoing a two-month trial scheduled to end 15 August 2010. Reviewers can review edits made by users who are not autoconfirmed to articles placed under pending changes. Pending changes is applied to only a small number of articles, similarly to how semi-protection is applied but in a more controlled way for the trial. The list of articles with pending changes awaiting review is located at Special:OldReviewedPages. When reviewing, edits should be accepted if they are not obvious vandalism or BLP violations, and not clearly problematic in light of the reason given for protection (see Wikipedia:Reviewing process). More detailed documentation and guidelines can be found here. If you do not want this userright, you may ask any administrator to remove it for you at any time. Courcelles (talk) 05:16, 20 June 2010 (UTC) Message on talk page[edit] Hi Bluezy. The message you posted on Talk:Atlantic salmon belonged more appropriately on the talk page of the IP who posted the copy violation, particularly since they had just posted it. Accordingly, I have transferred an (amended) version of your message to the IP's talk page. Thanks. --Epipelagic (talk) 01:28, 17 December 2010 (UTC) Speedy deletion nomination of File:Tikal Temple1 2006 08 11.JPG[edit] A tag has been placed on File:Tikal Temple1 2006 08 11.JPG requesting that it be speedily deleted from Wikipedia. This has been done under section F2 of the criteria for speedy deletion, because it is an image page for a missing or corrupt image or an empty image description page for a Commons-hosted image. If you think that this notice was placed here in error, contest the deletion by clicking on the button labelled "Click here to contest this speedy deletion". Doing so will take you to the talk page where you will find a pre-formatted place for you to explain why you believe the page should not be deleted. You can also visit the page's talk page directly to give your reasons, but be aware that once tagged for speedy deletion, if the page meets the criterion, it may be deleted without delay. Please do not remove the speedy deletion tag yourself, but don't hesitate to add information to the page that would render it more in conformance with Wikipedia's policies and guidelines. Sfan00 IMG (talk) 10:15, 11 December 2011 (UTC) ArbCom elections are now open![edit] Hi, You appear to be eligible to vote in the current Arbitration Committee election. The Arbitration Committee is the panel of editors responsible for conducting the Wikipedia arbitration process. It has the authority to enact binding solutions for disputes between editors, primarily related to serious behavioural issues that the community has been unable to resolve. This includes the ability to impose site bans, topic bans, editing restrictions, and other measures needed to maintain our editing environment. The arbitration policy describes the Committee's roles and responsibilities in greater detail. If you wish to participate, you are welcome to review the candidates' statements and submit your choices on the voting page. For the Election committee, MediaWiki message delivery (talk) 13:09, 23 November 2015 (UTC) ArbCom elections are now open![edit] Hi, You appear to be eligible to vote in the current Arbitration Committee election. The Arbitration Committee is the panel of editors responsible for conducting the Wikipedia arbitration process. It has the authority to enact binding solutions for disputes between editors, primarily related to serious behavioural issues that the community has been unable to resolve. This includes the ability to impose site bans, topic bans, editing restrictions, and other measures needed to maintain our editing environment. The arbitration policy describes the Committee's roles and responsibilities in greater detail. If you wish to participate, you are welcome to review the candidates' statements and submit your choices on the voting page. For the Election committee, MediaWiki message delivery (talk) 13:33, 23 November 2015 (UTC) Disambiguation link notification for April 26[edit] Hi. Thank you for your recent edits. Wikipedia appreciates your help. We noticed though that when you edited Manizales - Mariquita Cableway, you added links pointing to the disambiguation pages Caldas and Tolima (check to confirm | fix with Dab solver). Such links are almost always unintended, since a disambiguation page is merely a list of "Did you mean..." article titles. Read the FAQ • Join us at the DPL WikiProject. It's OK to remove this message. Also, to stop receiving these messages, follow these opt-out instructions. Thanks, DPL bot (talk) 10:33, 26 April 2016 (UTC) Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=User_talk:Bluezy&oldid=717208398" Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces User page Talk Variants Views Read Edit New section View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Featured content Current events Random article Donate to Wikipedia Wikipedia store Interaction Help About Wikipedia Community portal Recent changes Contact page Tools What links here Related changes User contributions Logs Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Print/export Create a book Download as PDF Printable version Languages This page was last modified on 26 April 2016, at 10:33. Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view