Rail transport - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Rail transport From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to: navigation, search "Railway" redirects here. For other uses, see Railway (disambiguation). "Railroad" redirects here. For other uses, see Railroad (disambiguation). For rail transport in different countries, see Rail transport by country Four BNSF GE C44-9W diesel locomotives hauling a mixed freight train along the banks of the Columbia River, between Kennewick and Wishram, Washington State, United States Part of a series on Transport Modes Aviation Cable Land Animal-powered Human-powered Rail Road Pipeline Ship Space Topics History Timeline Outline Transport portal v t e Part of a series on Rail transport Operations Track Maintenance High-speed railways Track gauge Stations Trains Locomotives Rolling stock Companies History Attractions Terminology (AU, NA, NZ, UK) By country Accidents Railway couplings Couplers by country Coupler conversion Variable gauge Gauge conversion Dual gauge Wheelset Bogie (truck) Dual coupling Rail subsidies Modelling v t e Rail transport is a means of conveyance of passengers and goods on wheeled vehicles running on rails. It is also commonly referred to as train transport. In contrast to road transport, where vehicles run on a prepared flat surface, rail vehicles ("rolling stock") are directionally guided by the tracks on which they run. Track usually consists of steel rails, installed on ties (sleepers) and ballast, on which the rolling stock, usually fitted with metal wheels, moves. Other variations are also possible, such as slab track, where the rails are fastened to a concrete foundation resting on a prepared subsurface. Rolling stock in railway transport systems generally suffers lower frictional resistance than road vehicles, and the passenger and freight cars (carriages and wagons) can be coupled into longer trains. The operation is carried out by a railway company, providing transport between railway stations or freight customer facilities. Power is provided by locomotives which either draw electric power from a railway electrification system or produce their own power, usually by diesel engines. Most tracks are accompanied by a signalling system. Railways are a safe land transport system when compared to other forms of transport.[Nb 1] Railway transport is capable of high levels of passenger and cargo utilization and energy efficiency, but is often less flexible and more capital-intensive than road transport, when lower traffic levels are considered. The oldest, man-hauled railways date back to the 6th century BC, with Periander, one of the Seven Sages of Greece, credited with its invention. Rail transport blossomed after the British development of the steam locomotive as a viable source of the power in the 18th and 19th centuries. With steam engines, one could construct mainline railways, which were a key component of the Industrial Revolution. Railways also reduced the costs of shipping, and allowed for fewer lost goods, compared with water transport, which faced occasional sinking of ships. The change from canals to railways allowed for "national markets" in which prices varied very little from city to city. The invention and development of the railway in Europe was one of the most important technological inventions of the 19th century; in the United States, it is estimated that without rail, GDP would have been lower by 7% in 1890. In the 1880s, electrified trains were introduced, and also the first tramways and rapid transit systems came into being. Starting during the 1940s, the non-electrified railways in most countries had their steam locomotives replaced by diesel-electric locomotives, with the process being almost complete by 2000. During the 1960s, electrified high-speed railway systems were introduced in Japan and later in some other countries. Other forms of guided ground transport outside the traditional railway definitions, such as monorail or maglev, have been tried but have seen limited use. Following decline after World War II due to competition from cars, rail transport has had a revival in recent decades due to road congestion and rising fuel prices, as well as governments investing in rail as a means of reducing CO2 emissions in the context of concerns about global warming. Contents 1 History 1.1 Pre-steam 1.2 Age of steam 1.2.1 Earliest British steam railways 1.2.2 Early railroads in the US 1.3 Electrification and Dieselisation 1.4 Innovations 2 Trains 2.1 Haulage 2.2 Motive power 2.3 Passenger trains 2.4 Freight train 3 Infrastructure 3.1 Right of way 3.2 Trackage 3.3 Train inspection systems 3.4 Signalling 3.5 Electrification 3.6 Stations 4 Operations 4.1 Ownership 4.2 Financing 4.3 Safety 4.4 Maintenance 5 Social, economical, and energetic aspects 5.1 Energy 5.1.1 Energy efficiency 5.2 Usage 5.3 Social and economic benefits 5.4 Modern rail as economic development indicator 5.5 Subsidies 5.5.1 USA 5.5.2 Europe 5.5.3 China 5.5.4 India 5.5.5 Russia 6 See also 7 References 8 Notes 9 External links History[edit] Main article: History of rail transport The history of the growth, decline and restoration to use of rail transport can be divided up into several discrete periods defined by the principal means of motive power used. Pre-steam[edit] Horsecar in Brno, Czech Republic The earliest evidence of a railway was a 6-kilometre (3.7 mi) Diolkos wagonway, which transported boats across the Corinth isthmus in Greece during the 6th century BC. Trucks pushed by slaves ran in grooves in limestone, which provided the track element. The Diolkos operated for over 600 years.[1] Railways began reappearing in Europe after the Dark Ages. The earliest known record of a railway in Europe from this period is a stained-glass window in the Minster of Freiburg im Breisgau in Germany, dating from around 1350.[2] In 1515, Cardinal Matthäus Lang wrote a description of the Reisszug, a funicular railway at the Hohensalzburg Castle in Austria. The line originally used wooden rails and a hemp haulage rope, and was operated by human or animal power. The line still exists, albeit in updated form, and is one of the oldest railways still to operate.[3][4] By 1550, narrow gauge railways with wooden rails were common in mines in Europe.[5] By the early 17th century, wooden wagonways were common in England and Wales for transporting coal from mines to canal wharfs for transshipment to boats. The world's oldest working railway, built in 1758, is the Middleton Railway in Leeds. In 1764, the first gravity railroad in the United States was built in Lewiston, New York.[6] The first permanent tramway was the Leiper Railroad in 1810.[7] The first iron plate railway, made with wrought iron plates on top of wooden rails, came into use in 1768.[8] This allowed a variation of gauge to be used. At first only balloon loops could be used for turning, but later, movable points were taken into use that allowed for switching.[9] From the 1790s, iron edge rails began to appear in Great Britain.[10] In 1803, William Jessop opened the Surrey Iron Railway in south London, arguably the world's first horse-drawn public railway.[11] The invention of the wrought iron rail by John Birkinshaw in 1820 allowed the short, brittle, and often uneven, cast iron rails to be extended to 15 feet (4.6 m) lengths.[12] These were succeeded by steel in 1857.[10] Age of steam[edit] A British steam locomotive-hauled train Tren a las Nubes (Train to the Clouds), located in Salta, Argentina The development of the steam engine during the Industrial Revolution in Great Britain, initially for pumping water, spurred ideas for mobile steam locomotives that could haul heavy weights on tracks. James Watt's patented steam engines of 1769 (patent revised in 1782) were heavy low-pressure engines which were not suitable for use in locomotives. However, in 1804, using high-pressure steam, Richard Trevithick demonstrated the first locomotive-hauled train at Merthyr Tydfil, in South Wales.[13][14] Accompanied with Andrew Vivian, it ran with mixed success,[15] breaking some of the brittle cast-iron plates.[16] Two years later, the first passenger horse-drawn railway was opened nearby between Swansea and Mumbles.[17] Earliest British steam railways[edit] In 1811, John Blenkinsop designed the first successful and practical railway locomotive[18]—a rack railway worked by a steam locomotive between Middleton Colliery and Leeds on the Middleton Railway. His first locomotive, called Salamanca, was built the following year.[19]:20 In 1825, George Stephenson built the Locomotion for the Stockton and Darlington Railway, north east England, which was the first public steam railway in the world. In 1829, he built the Rocket, which was entered in and won the Rainhill Trials. This success led to Stephenson establishing his company as the pre-eminent builder of steam locomotives for Railways in Great Britain and Ireland, the United States, and much of Europe.[19]:24–30 In 1830, the first intercity route, the Liverpool and Manchester Railway, was opened. The gauge was that used for the early wagon-ways, which had been adopted for the Stockton and Darlington Railway,[20] with a 1,435 mm (4 ft 8 1⁄2 in) width which became known as the international standard gauge, still used by about 60% of the world's railways. This spurred the spread of rail transport outside the British Isles. By the early 1850s, Great Britain had over 7,000 miles (11,000 km) of railway, a stunning achievement given that only twenty years had elapsed since the opening of the Liverpool and Manchester Railway.[21] Early railroads in the US[edit] Railroads (as they are known in the US) were built on a far larger scale than those in Continental Europe, both in terms of the distances covered, and also in the loading gauge adopted, which allowed for heavier locomotives and double-deck trains. The railroad era in the United States began in 1830 when Peter Cooper's locomotive, Tom Thumb, first steamed along 13 miles (21 km) of Baltimore and Ohio railroad track.[22] In 1833, the nation's second railroad ran 136 miles (219 km) from Charleston to Hamburg in South Carolina.[23] Not until the 1850s, though, did railroads offer long distance service at reasonable rates. A journey from Philadelphia to Charleston involved eight different gauges, which meant that passengers and freight had to change trains seven times. Only at places like Bowling Green, Kentucky, were the railroads connected to one another. The Baltimore and Ohio Railroad that opened in 1830 was the first to evolve from a single line to a network in the United States.[24] By 1831, a steam railway connected Albany and Schenectady, New York, a distance of 16 miles (26 km), which was covered in 40 minutes.[25] The years between 1850 and 1890 saw phenomenal growth in the US railroad system, which at its peak constituted one third of the world's total mileage.[26][not in citation given] Although the American Civil War placed a temporary halt to major new developments, the conflict did demonstrate the enormous strategic importance of railways at times of war. After the war, major developments include the first elevated railway built in New York in 1867 as well as the symbolically important first transcontinental railroad completed in 1869.[27] Electrification and Dieselisation[edit] 0-Series Shinkansen, introduced in 1964, triggered the intercity train travel boom. Elevated section of the Chicago 'L' Luas in Dublin, Ireland Experiments with electrical railways were started by Robert Davidson in 1838. He completed a battery-powered carriage capable of 6.4 km/h (4 mph). The Gross-Lichterfelde Tramway was the first to use electricity fed to the trains en route, when it opened in 1881. Overhead wires were taken into use in the Mödling and Hinterbrühl Tram in Austria in October 1883. At first, this was taken into use on tramways that, until then, had been horse-drawn tramcars. The first conventional completely electrified railway mainline was the 106 km Valtellina line in Italy that was opened on 4 September 1902. During the 1890s, many large cities, such as London, Paris and New York City used the new technology to build rapid transit for urban commuting. In smaller cities, tramways became common and were often the only mode of public transport until the introduction of buses in the 1920s. In North America, interurbans became a common mode to reach suburban areas. At first, all electric railways used direct current but, in 1904, the Stubaital Line in Austria opened with alternating current.[28] Steam locomotives require large pools of labour to clean, load, maintain and run. After World War II, dramatically increased labour costs in developed countries made steam an increasingly costly form of motive power. At the same time, the war had forced improvements in internal combustion engine technology that made diesel locomotives cheaper and more powerful. This caused many railway companies to initiate programmes to convert all unelectrified sections from steam to diesel locomotion. Following the large-scale construction of motorways after the war, rail transport became less popular for commuting and air transport started taking large market shares from long-haul passenger trains. Most tramways were either replaced by rapid transit or buses, while high transshipment costs caused short-haul freight trains to become uncompetitive. The 1973 oil crisis led to a change of mind set and most tram systems that had survived into the 1970s remain today. At the same time, containerization allowed freight trains to become more competitive and participate in intermodal freight transport. With the 1964 introduction of the Shinkansen high-speed rail in Japan, trains could again have a dominant position on intercity travel. During the 1970s, the introduction of automated rapid transit systems allowed cheaper operation. The 1990s saw an increased focus on accessibility and low-floor trains. Many tramways have been upgraded to light rail and many cities that closed their old tramways have reopened new light railway systems. Innovations[edit] Many benchmarks in equipment and infrastructure led to the growing use of railways. Some innovative features taking place in the 19th and 20th centuries included wood cars replaced with all-steel cars, which provided better safety and maintenance; iron rails replaced with steel rails, which provided higher speed and capacity with lower weight and cost; stove-heated cars to steam-heating cars, piped from locomotive; gas lighting to electric lighting, with use of battery/alternator unit beneath the car; development of air-conditioning with additional underbody equipment and ice compartment. Some innovative rolling stock included the lightweight, diesel-powered streamliner, which was a modernistic, aerodynamically styled train with flowing contours; then came the ultra-lightweight car with internal combustion engine in each train's power car; others included the dome car, turbined-powered trains, bi-level rolling stock, and the high-tech/high-speed electric trains.[29][page needed] Even more, in the first half of the 20th century, infrastructure elements adopted technological changes including the continuously welded rail that was 1⁄4 mile (0.40 km) long; concrete tie usage; double tracking major lines; intermodal terminal and handling technology; advances in diesel-electric propulsion to include AC traction systems and propulsion braking systems; and just-in-time inventory control. Beyond technology, even management of systems saw improvements with the adoption of environmental impact concerns; heightened concern of employee and public safety; introduction of urban area rail networks and public agencies to manage them; and downsizing of industry employment with greater use of contractors and consultants.[30] Trains[edit] Main article: Train A train is a connected series of rail vehicles that move along the track. Propulsion for the train is provided by a separate locomotive or from individual motors in self-propelled multiple units. Most trains carry a revenue load, although non-revenue cars exist for the railway's own use, such as for maintenance-of-way purposes. The engine driver (engineer in North America) controls the locomotive or other power cars, although people movers and some rapid transits are under automatic control. Haulage[edit] Russian 2TE10U Diesel-electric locomotive Traditionally, trains are pulled using a locomotive. This involves one or more powered vehicles being located at the front of the train, providing sufficient tractive force to haul the weight of the full train. This arrangement remains dominant for freight trains and is often used for passenger trains. A push-pull train has the end passenger car equipped with a driver's cab so that the engine driver can remotely control the locomotive. This allows one of the locomotive-hauled train's drawbacks to be removed, since the locomotive need not be moved to the front of the train each time the train changes direction. A railroad car is a vehicle used for the haulage of either passengers or freight. A multiple unit has powered wheels throughout the whole train. These are used for rapid transit and tram systems, as well as many both short- and long-haul passenger trains. A railcar is a single, self-powered car, and may be electrically-propelled or powered by a diesel engine. Multiple units have a driver's cab at each end of the unit, and were developed following the ability to build electric motors and engines small enough to fit under the coach. There are only a few freight multiple units, most of which are high-speed post trains. Motive power[edit] A RegioSwinger multiple unit of the Croatian Railways Steam locomotives are locomotives with a steam engine that provides adhesion. Coal, petroleum, or wood is burned in a firebox, boiling water in the boiler to create pressurized steam. The steam travels through the smokebox before leaving via the chimney or smoke stack. In the process, it powers a piston that transmits power directly through a connecting rod (US: main rod) and a crankpin (US: wristpin) on the driving wheel (US main driver) or to a crank on a driving axle. Steam locomotives have been phased out in most parts of the world for economical and safety reasons, although many are preserved in working order by heritage railways. Electric locomotives draw power from a stationary source via an overhead wire or third rail. Some also or instead use a battery. In locomotives that are powered by high voltage alternating current, a transformer in the locomotive converts the high voltage, low current power to low voltage, high current used in the traction motors that power the wheels. Modern locomotives may use three-phase AC induction motors or direct current motors. Under certain conditions, electric locomotives are the most powerful traction.[citation needed] They are also the cheapest to run and provide less noise and no local air pollution.[citation needed] However, they require high capital investments both for the overhead lines and the supporting infrastructure, as well as the generating station that is needed to produce electricity. Accordingly, electric traction is used on urban systems, lines with high traffic and for high-speed rail. Diesel locomotives use a diesel engine as the prime mover. The energy transmission may be either diesel-electric, diesel-mechanical or diesel-hydraulic but diesel-electric is dominant. Electro-diesel locomotives are built to run as diesel-electric on unelectrified sections and as electric locomotives on electrified sections. Alternative methods of motive power include magnetic levitation, horse-drawn, cable, gravity, pneumatics and gas turbine. Passenger trains[edit] Interior view of the top deck of a VR InterCity2 double-deck carriage A passenger train travels between stations where passengers may embark and disembark. The oversight of the train is the duty of a guard/train manager/conductor. Passenger trains are part of public transport and often make up the stem of the service, with buses feeding to stations. Passenger trains provide long-distance intercity travel, daily commuter trips, or local urban transit services. They even include a diversity of vehicles, operating speeds, right-of-way requirements, and service frequency. Passenger trains usually can be divided into two operations: intercity railway and intracity transit. Whereas as intercity railway involve higher speeds, longer routes, and lower frequency (usually scheduled), intracity transit involves lower speeds, shorter routes, and higher frequency (especially during peak hours).[30] Intercity trains are long-haul trains that operate with few stops between cities. Trains typically have amenities such as a dining car. Some lines also provide over-night services with sleeping cars. Some long-haul trains have been given a specific name. Regional trains are medium distance trains that connect cities with outlying, surrounding areas, or provide a regional service, making more stops and having lower speeds. Commuter trains serve suburbs of urban areas, providing a daily commuting service. Airport rail links provide quick access from city centres to airports. High-speed rail are special inter-city trains that operate at much higher speeds than conventional railways, the limit being regarded at 200 to 320 kilometres per hour (120 to 200 mph). High-speed trains are used mostly for long-haul service and most systems are in Western Europe and East Asia. The speed record is 574.8 km/h (357.2 mph), set by a modified French TGV.[31][32] Magnetic levitation trains such as the Shanghai airport train use under-riding magnets which attract themselves upward towards the underside of a guideway and this line has achieved somewhat higher peak speeds in day-to-day operation than conventional high-speed railways, although only over short distances. Due to their heightened speeds, route alignments for high-speed rail tend to have shallower grades and broader curves than conventional railways. Their high kinetic energy translates to higher horsepower-to-ton ratios (e.g. 20 horsepower per short ton or 16 kilowatts per tonne); this allows trains to accelerate and maintain higher speeds and negotiate steep grades as momentum builds up and recovered in downgrades (reducing cut, fill, and tunneling requirements). Since lateral forces act on curves, curvatures are designed with the highest possible radius. All these features are dramatically different from freight operations, thus justifying exclusive high-speed rail lines if it is economically feasible.[30] Rail network in Paris, France Higher-speed rail services are intercity rail services that have top speeds higher than conventional intercity trains but the speeds are not as high as those in the high-speed rail services. These services are provided after improvements to the conventional rail infrastructure in order to support trains that can operate safely at higher speeds. High speed railway (High Speed Railroad/Railway & Railroad/Railway high speed) commonly referred to as the High-speed Rail (abbre:HR[hairei]), is a kind of operating speed of at least eighty percent more than in the whole operation process of distance over 200 km/h (120 mph). As of 2014, the operating speed of High-speed Rail systems in the world are running about all set at 300 km/h (190 mph), a few systems have relatively high speed. For High-speed Rail speed can be considered: High-speed Rail lines after transformation from common railroad, such High-speed Rail maximum speed of approximately 250 km/h (160 mph). Construction standards for the ballasted bed (stone ballast) high-speed railway was built, such High-speed Rail maximum speed of approximately 320 km/h (200 mph). Construction of ballastless track technology standards (that is popular opinion of to lay the rail on the reinforced concrete pavement directly ) was built, to China High-speed Rail represented such High-speed Rail mostly built in high-speed bridge (overhead bridge), so called air railway (air railroad), such High-speed Rail maximum speed of approximately 400 km/h (250 mph). High speed railway is a high-tech integrated system, including 6 aspects: infrastructure, also including the station construction. high speed train. electricity and telecommunications, including electrical and contact network, safe and reliable communication, signal, dispatching center console. safety control part, including meteorological conditions monitoring, line monitoring, automatic train control and retrieval, road, vehicle automatic monitoring and response system. maintenance and maintenance section, including the line maintenance, high speed train (highspeed divided dynamic train abbre:HDDT) maintenance and repair, involving a variety of instrumentation maintenance and repair, and maintenance of equipment and monitoring instruments. the other parts, including passenger safety assessment sent, High-speed Rail prospective study, the new High-speed Rail line and the new high speed train or high speed train test, High-speed Rail financial, High-speed Rail operational data storage and analysis, etc. Rapid transit is an intracity system built in large cities and has the highest capacity of any passenger transport system. It is usually grade-separated and commonly built underground or elevated. At street level, smaller trams can be used. Light rails are upgraded trams that have step-free access, their own right-of-way and sometimes sections underground. Monorail systems are elevated, medium-capacity systems. A people mover is a driverless, grade-separated train that serves only a few stations, as a shuttle. Due to the lack of uniformity of rapid transit systems, route alignment varies, with diverse rights-of-way (private land, side of road, street median) and geometric characteristics (sharp or broad curves, steep or gentle grades). For instance, the Chicago 'L' trains are designed with extremely short cars to negotiate the sharp curves in the Loop. New Jersey's PATH has similar-sized cars to accommodate curves in the trans-Hudson tunnels. San Francisco's BART operates large cars on its well-engineered routes.[30] Freight train[edit] Main article: Rail freight transport Bulk cargo of minerals A freight train hauls cargo using freight cars specialized for the type of goods. Freight trains are very efficient, with economy of scale and high energy efficiency. However, their use can be reduced by lack of flexibility, if there is need of transshipment at both ends of the trip due to lack of tracks to the points of pick-up and delivery. Authorities often encourage the use of cargo rail transport due to its environmental profile.[33] Container trains have become the dominant type in the US for non-bulk haulage. Containers can easily be transshipped to other modes, such as ships and trucks, using cranes. This has succeeded the boxcar (wagon-load), where the cargo had to be loaded and unloaded into the train manually. The intermodal containerization of cargo has revolutionized the supply chain logistics industry, reducing ship costs significantly. In Europe, the sliding wall wagon has largely superseded the ordinary covered wagons. Other types of cars include refrigerator cars, stock cars for livestock and autoracks for road vehicles. When rail is combined with road transport, a roadrailer will allow trailers to be driven onto the train, allowing for easy transition between road and rail. Bulk handling represents a key advantage for rail transport. Low or even zero transshipment costs combined with energy efficiency and low inventory costs allow trains to handle bulk much cheaper than by road. Typical bulk cargo includes coal, ore, grains and liquids. Bulk is transported in open-topped cars, hopper cars and tank cars. Infrastructure[edit] Left: Railway turnouts; Right: Chicago Transit Authority control tower 18 guides elevated Chicago 'L' north and southbound Purple and Brown lines intersecting with east and westbound Pink and Green lines and the looping Orange line above the Wells and Lake street intersection in the loop at an elevated right of way. Right of way[edit] Railway tracks are laid upon land owned or leased by the railway company. Owing to the desirability of maintaining modest grades, rails will often be laid in circuitous routes in hilly or mountainous terrain. Route length and grade requirements can be reduced by the use of alternating cuttings, bridges and tunnels—all of which can greatly increase the capital expenditures required to develop a right of way, while significantly reducing operating costs and allowing higher speeds on longer radius curves. In densely urbanized areas, railways are sometimes laid in tunnels to minimize the effects on existing properties. Trackage[edit] Main article: Trackage Map of railways in Europe with main operational lines shown in black, heritage railway lines in green and former routes in light blue Long freight train crossing the Stoney Creek viaduct on the Canadian Pacific Railway in southern British Columbia Track consists of two parallel steel rails, anchored perpendicular to members called ties (sleepers) of timber, concrete, steel, or plastic to maintain a consistent distance apart, or rail gauge. Rail gauges are usually categorised as Standard gauge (1,435 mm (4 ft 8 1⁄2 in)) used on approximately 54.8% of the world's existing railway lines, Broad gauge and Narrow gauge.[citation needed] In addition to the rail gauge, the tracks will be laid to conform with a Loading gauge which defines the maximum height and width for railway vehicles and their loads to ensure safe passage through bridges, tunnels and other structures. The track guides the conical, flanged wheels, keeping the cars on the track without active steering and therefore allowing trains to be much longer than road vehicles. The rails and ties are usually placed on a foundation made of compressed earth on top of which is placed a bed of ballast to distribute the load from the ties and to prevent the track from buckling as the ground settles over time under the weight of the vehicles passing above. The ballast also serves as a means of drainage. Some more modern track in special areas is attached by direct fixation without ballast. Track may be prefabricated or assembled in place. By welding rails together to form lengths of continuous welded rail, additional wear and tear on rolling stock caused by the small surface gap at the joints between rails can be counteracted; this also makes for a quieter ride (passenger trains). On curves the outer rail may be at a higher level than the inner rail. This is called superelevation or cant. This reduces the forces tending to displace the track and makes for a more comfortable ride for standing livestock and standing or seated passengers. A given amount of superelevation will be the most effective over a limited range of speeds. Turnouts, also known as points and switches, are the means of directing a train onto a diverging section of track. Laid similar to normal track, a point typically consists of a frog (common crossing), check rails and two switch rails. The switch rails may be moved left or right, under the control of the signalling system, to determine which path the train will follow. Spikes in wooden ties can loosen over time, but split and rotten ties may be individually replaced with new wooden ties or concrete substitutes. Concrete ties can also develop cracks or splits, and can also be replaced individually. Should the rails settle due to soil subsidence, they can be lifted by specialized machinery and additional ballast tamped under the ties to level the rails. Periodically, ballast must be removed and replaced with clean ballast to ensure adequate drainage. Culverts and other passages for water must be kept clear lest water is impounded by the trackbed, causing landslips. Where trackbeds are placed along rivers, additional protection is usually placed to prevent streambank erosion during times of high water. Bridges require inspection and maintenance, since they are subject to large surges of stress in a short period of time when a heavy train crosses. Train inspection systems[edit] A Hot bearing detector w/ dragging equipment unit The inspection of railway equipment is essential for the safe movement of trains. Many types of defect detectors are in use on the world's railroads. These devices utilize technologies that vary from a simplistic paddle and switch to infrared and laser scanning, and even ultrasonic audio analysis. Their use has avoided many rail accidents over the 70 years they have been used. Signalling[edit] Bardon Hill box in England is a Midland Railway box dating from 1899, although the original mechanical lever frame has been replaced by electrical switches. Seen here in 2009. Railway signalling is a system used to control railway traffic safely to prevent trains from colliding. Being guided by fixed rails with low friction, trains are uniquely susceptible to collision since they frequently operate at speeds that do not enable them to stop quickly or within the driver's sighting distance. Most forms of train control involve movement authority being passed from those responsible for each section of a rail network to the train crew. Not all methods require the use of signals, and some systems are specific to single track railways. The signalling process is traditionally carried out in a signal box, a small building that houses the lever frame required for the signalman to operate switches and signal equipment. These are placed at various intervals along the route of a railway, controlling specified sections of track. More recent technological developments have made such operational doctrine superfluous, with the centralization of signalling operations to regional control rooms. This has been facilitated by the increased use of computers, allowing vast sections of track to be monitored from a single location. The common method of block signalling divides the track into zones guarded by combinations of block signals, operating rules, and automatic-control devices so that only one train may be in a block at any time. Electrification[edit] Main article: Railway electrification system The electrification system provides electrical energy to the trains, so they can operate without a prime mover on board. This allows lower operating costs, but requires large capital investments along the lines. Mainline and tram systems normally have overhead wires, which hang from poles along the line. Grade-separated rapid transit sometimes use a ground third rail. Power may be fed as direct or alternating current. The most common DC voltages are 600 and 750 V for tram and rapid transit systems, and 1,500  and 3,000 V for mainlines. The two dominant AC systems are 15 kV AC and 25 kV AC. Stations[edit] Goods station in Lucerne, Switzerland A railway station serves as an area where passengers can board and alight from trains. A goods station is a yard which is exclusively used for loading and unloading cargo. Large passenger stations have at least one building providing conveniences for passengers, such as purchasing tickets and food. Smaller stations typically only consist of a platform. Early stations were sometimes built with both passenger and goods facilities.[34] Platforms are used to allow easy access to the trains, and are connected to each other via underpasses, footbridges and level crossings. Some large stations are built as culs-de-sac, with trains only operating out from one direction. Smaller stations normally serve local residential areas, and may have connection to feeder bus services. Large stations, in particular central stations, serve as the main public transport hub for the city, and have transfer available between rail services, and to rapid transit, tram or bus services. Operations[edit] Ownership[edit] In the United States, railroads such as the Union Pacific traditionally own and operate both their rolling stock and infrastructure, with the company itself typically being privately owned. Since the 1980s, there has been an increasing trend to split up railway companies, with companies owning the rolling stock separated from those owning the infrastructure. This is particularly true in Europe, where this arrangement is required by the European Union. This has allowed open access by any train operator to any portion of the European railway network. In the UK, the railway track is state owned, with a public controlled body (Network Rail) running, maintaining and developing the track, while Train Operating Companies have run the trains since privatisation in the 1990s.[35] In the U.S., virtually all rail networks and infrastructure outside the Northeast Corridor are privately owned by freight lines. Passenger lines, primarily Amtrak, operate as tenants on the freight lines. Consequently, operations must be closely synchronized and coordinated between freight and passenger railroads, with passenger trains often being dispatched by the host freight railroad. Due to this shared system, both are regulated by the Federal Railroad Administration (FRA) and may follow the AREMA recommended practices for track work and AAR standards for vehicles.[30] Financing[edit] The main source of income for railway companies is from ticket revenue (for passenger transport) and shipment fees for cargo. Discounts and monthly passes are sometimes available for frequent travellers (e.g. season ticket and rail pass). Freight revenue may be sold per container slot or for a whole train. Sometimes, the shipper owns the cars and only rents the haulage. For passenger transport, advertisement income can be significant. Governments may choose to give subsidies to rail operation, since rail transport has fewer externalities than other dominant modes of transport. If the railway company is state-owned, the state may simply provide direct subsidies in exchange for increased production. If operations have been privatized, several options are available. Some countries have a system where the infrastructure is owned by a government agency or company—with open access to the tracks for any company that meets safety requirements. In such cases, the state may choose to provide the tracks free of charge, or for a fee that does not cover all costs. This is seen as analogous to the government providing free access to roads. For passenger operations, a direct subsidy may be paid to a public-owned operator, or public service obligation tender may be helt, and a time-limited contract awarded to the lowest bidder. Total EU rail subsidies amounted to €73 billion in 2005.[36] Amtrak, the US passenger rail service, and Canada's Via Rail are private railroad companies chartered by their respective national governments. As private passenger services declined because of competition from automobiles and airlines, they became shareholders of Amtrak either with a cash entrance fee or relinquishing their locomotives and rolling stock. The government subsidizes Amtrak by supplying start-up capital and making up for losses at the end of the fiscal year.[29][page needed] Safety[edit] According to Eurostat and European Railway Agency, on European railways, there is a fatality risk for passengers and occupants 28 times lower compared with car usage. Based on data by EU-27 member nations, 2008-2010.[37][38] Trains can travel at very high speed, but they are heavy, are unable to deviate from the track and require a great distance to stop. Possible accidents include derailment (jumping the track), a collision with another train or collision with automobiles, other vehicles or pedestrians at level crossings. The last accounts for the majority of rail accidents and casualties. The most important safety measures to prevent accidents are strict operating rules, e.g. railway signalling and gates or grade separation at crossings. Train whistles, bells or horns warn of the presence of a train, while trackside signals maintain the distances between trains. An important element in the safety of many high-speed inter-city networks such as Japan's Shinkansen is the fact that trains only run on dedicated railway lines, without level crossings. This effectively eliminates the potential for collision with automobiles, other vehicles or pedestrians, vastly reduces the likelihood of collision with other trains and helps ensure services remain timely. Maintenance[edit] As in any infrastructure asset, railways must keep up with periodic inspection and maintenance in order to minimize effect of infrastructure failures that can disrupt freight revenue operations and passenger services. Because passengers are considered the most crucial cargo and usually operate at higher speeds, steeper grades, and higher capacity/frequency, their lines are especially important. Inspection practices include track geometry cars or walking inspection. Curve maintenance especially for transit services includes gauging, fastener tightening, and rail replacement. Rail corrugation is a common issue with transit systems due to the high number of light-axle, wheel passages which result in grinding of the wheel/rail interface. Since maintenance may overlap with operations, maintenance windows (nighttime hours, off-peak hours, altering train schedules or routes) must be closely followed. In addition, passenger safety during maintenance work (inter-track fencing, proper storage of materials, track work notices, hazards of equipment near states) must be regarded at all times. At times, maintenance access problems can emerge due to tunnels, elevated structures, and congested cityscapes. Here, specialized equipment or smaller versions of conventional maintenance gear are used.[30] Unlike highways or road networks where capacity is disaggregated into unlinked trips over individual route segments, railway capacity is fundamentally considered a network system. As a result, many components are causes and effects of system disruptions. Maintenance must acknowledge the vast array of a route's performance (type of train service, origination/destination, seasonal impacts), line's capacity (length, terrain, number of tracks, types of train control), trains throughput (max speeds, acceleration/deceleration rates), and service features with shared passenger-freight tracks (sidings, terminal capacities, switching routes, and design type).[30] Social, economical, and energetic aspects[edit] Energy[edit] BNSF Railway freight service in the United States German InterCityExpress (ICE) Rail transport is an energy-efficient[39] but capital-intensive, means of mechanized land transport. The tracks provide smooth and hard surfaces on which the wheels of the train can roll with a minimum of friction. Moving a vehicle on and/or through a medium (land, sea, or air) requires overcoming resistance to motion. A land vehicle's total resistance (in pounds or Newtons) is a quadratic function of the vehicle's speed: where: R denotes total resistance a denotes initial constant resistance b denotes velocity-related constant c denotes constant that is function of shape, frontal area, and sides of vehicle v denotes velocity v2 denotes velocity, squared[30] Essentially, resistance differs between vehicle's contact point and surface of roadway. Metal wheels on metal rails have a significant advantage of overcoming resistance compared to rubber-tired wheels on any road surface (railway – 0.001g at 10 miles per hour (16 km/h) and 0.024g at 60 miles per hour (97 km/h); truck – 0.009g at 10 miles per hour (16 km/h) and 0.090 at 60 miles per hour (97 km/h)). In terms of cargo capacity combining speed and size being moved in a day: human – can carry 100 pounds (45 kg) for 20 miles (32 km) per day, or 1 tmi/day (1.5 tkm/day) horse and wheelbarrow – can carry 4 tmi/day (5.8 tkm/day) horse cart on good pavement – can carry 10 tmi/day (14 tkm/day) fully utility truck – can carry 20,000 tmi/day (29,000 tkm/day)[citation needed] long-haul train – can carry 500,000 tmi/day (730,000 tkm/day)[30] Most trains take 250–400 trucks off the road, thus making the road more safe. In terms of the horsepower to weight ratio, a slow-moving barge requires 0.2 horsepower per short ton (0.16 kW/t), a railway and pipeline requires 2.5 horsepower per short ton (2.1 kW/t), and truck requires 10 horsepower per short ton (8.2 kW/t). However, at higher speeds, a railway overcomes the barge and proves most economical.[30] As an example, a typical modern wagon can hold up to 113 tonnes (125 short tons) of freight on two four-wheel bogies. The track distributes the weight of the train evenly, allowing significantly greater loads per axle and wheel than in road transport, leading to less wear and tear on the permanent way. This can save energy compared with other forms of transport, such as road transport, which depends on the friction between rubber tires and the road. Trains have a small frontal area in relation to the load they are carrying, which reduces air resistance and thus energy usage. In addition, the presence of track guiding the wheels allows for very long trains to be pulled by one or a few engines and driven by a single operator, even around curves, which allows for economies of scale in both manpower and energy use; by contrast, in road transport, more than two articulations causes fishtailing and makes the vehicle unsafe. Energy efficiency[edit] Main article: Energy efficiency in transportation § Trains Considering only the energy spent to move the means of transport, and using the example of the urban area of Lisbon, electric trains seem to be on average 20 times more efficient than automobiles for transportation of passengers, if we consider energy spent per passenger-distance with similar occupation ratios.[40] Considering an automobile with a consumption of around 6 l/100 km (47 mpg-imp; 39 mpg-US) of gasoline, the average car in Europe has an occupancy of around 1.2 passengers per automobile (occupation ratio around 24%) and that one litre of gasoline amounts to about 8.8 kWh (32 MJ), equating to an average of 441 Wh (1,590 kJ) per passenger-km. This compares to a modern train with an average occupancy of 20% and a consumption of about 8.5 kW·h/km (31 MJ/km; 13.7 kW·h/mi), equating to 21.5 Wh (77 kJ) per passenger-km, 20 times less than the automobile. Usage[edit] Due to these benefits, rail transport is a major form of passenger and freight transport in many countries. It is ubiquitous in Europe, with an integrated network covering virtually the whole continent. In India, China, South Korea and Japan, many millions use trains as regular transport. In North America, freight rail transport is widespread and heavily used, but intercity passenger rail transport is relatively scarce outside the Northeast Corridor, due to increased preference of other modes, particularly automobiles and airplanes.[29][page needed][41] WAP 7 locomotive in India Indian locomotive class WDG-3A one of the high power locomotives in India South Africa, northern Africa and Argentina have extensive rail networks, but some railways elsewhere in Africa and South America are isolated lines. Australia has a generally sparse network befitting its population density but has some areas with significant networks, especially in the southeast. In addition to the previously existing east-west transcontinental line in Australia, a line from north to south has been constructed. The highest railway in the world is the line to Lhasa, in Tibet,[42] partly running over permafrost territory. Western Europe has the highest railway density in the world and many individual trains there operate through several countries despite technical and organizational differences in each national network. Social and economic benefits[edit] Japanese Shinkansen Railways are central to the formation of modernity and ideas of progress.[43] Railways contribute to social vibrancy and economic competitiveness by transporting multitudes of customers and workers to city centres and inner suburbs. Hong Kong has recognized rail as "the backbone of the public transit system" and as such developed their franchised bus system and road infrastructure in comprehensive alignment with their rail services.[44] China's large cities such as Beijing, Shanghai, and Guangzhou recognize rail transit lines as the framework and bus lines as the main body to their metropolitan transportation systems.[45] The Japanese Shinkansen was built to meet the growing traffic demand in the "heart of Japan's industry and economy" situated on the Tokyo-Kobe line.[46] German soldiers in a railway car on the way to the front in August 1914. The message on the car reads Von München über Metz nach Paris. (From Munich via Metz to Paris). During much of the 20th century, rail was an invaluable element of military mobilization, allowing for the quick and efficient transport of large numbers of reservists to their mustering-points, and infantry soldiers to the front lines. However, by the 21st century, rail transport - limited to locations on the same continent, and vulnerable to air attack - had largely been displaced by the adoption of aerial transport. Railways channel growth toward dense city agglomerations and along their arteries, as opposed to highway expansion, indicative of the U.S. transportation policy, which incents development of suburbs at the periphery, contributing to increased vehicle miles traveled, carbon emissions, development of greenfield spaces, and depletion of natural reserves. These arrangements revalue city spaces, local taxes,[47] housing values, and promotion of mixed use development.[48][49] Modern rail as economic development indicator[edit] European development economists have argued that the existence of modern rail infrastructure is a significant indicator of a country's economic advancement: this perspective is illustrated notably through the Basic Rail Transportation Infrastructure Index (known as BRTI Index).[50] Subsidies[edit] Main article: Rail subsidies USA[edit] For rail subsidies in the USA, see Amtrak public funding and Modern US rail history Current subsidies for Amtrak (passenger rail) are around $1.4 billion.[51] The rail freight industry does not receive subsidies. Europe[edit] European rail subsidies in euros per passenger-km for 2008[52] For subsidies in Europe, see European rail subsidies Country Subsidy in billions of Euros Year  Germany 17.0 2014[53]  France 13.2 2013[54]  Italy 8.1 2009[55]  Spain 5.1 2015[56]  United Kingdom 4.5 2015[57]   Switzerland 4.3 2012[58]  Belgium 3.4 2008[52]  Netherlands 2.5 2014[59]  Austria 2.3 2009[52]  Denmark 1.7 2008[52]  Sweden 1.6 2009[60]  Poland 1.4 2008[61]  Ireland 0.91 2008[61] China[edit] In 2014, total rail spending by China was $130 billion and is likely to remain at a similar rate for the rest of the country's next Five Year Period (2016-2020).[62] India[edit] The Indian railways are subsidised by around Rs 400 billion ($5.8 billion), of which around 60% of which goes to commuter rail and short-haul trips.[63][64] Russia[edit] In total, Russian Railways receives 112 billion roubles (around US$1.5 billion) annually from the government.[65] See also[edit] Trains portal Trams portal Transport portal Lists portal Environmental design in rail transportation International Union of Railways List of rail transport topics List of railroad-related periodicals List of railway companies List of transnational trains List of transnational railways List of railway industry occupations Mega project Mine railway Passenger rail terminology Rail transport by country Rail transport in Disney Parks Rail usage statistics by country Railway systems engineering Transport Revolution References[edit] ^ Lewis, M. J. T. "Railways in the Greek and Roman World" (PDF). Retrieved 11 April 2009.  ^ Hylton, Stuart (2007). The Grand Experiment: The Birth of the Railway Age 1820–1845. Ian Allan Publishing.  ^ Kriechbaum, Reinhard (15 May 2004). "Die große Reise auf den Berg". der Tagespost (in German). Retrieved 22 April 2009.  ^ "Der Reiszug – Part 1 – Presentation". Funimag. Retrieved 22 April 2009.  ^ Georgius Agricola (1913). De re metallica. ISBN 0-486-60006-8.  ^ Porter, Peter (1914). Landmarks of the Niagara Frontier. The Author. ISBN 0-665-78347-7.  ^ Morlok, Edward K. (11 May 2005). "First permanent railroad in the U.S. and its connection to the University of Pennsylvania". Retrieved 19 September 2007.  ^ at Coalbrookdale Railways (pt 1). Encyclopædia Britannica. 1902. ISBN 1-872524-63-X. Retrieved 15 February 2011.  ^ Vaughan, A. (1997). Railwaymen, Politics and Money. London: John Murray. ISBN 0-7195-5746-1.  ^ a b Marshall, John (1979). The Guinness Book of Rail Facts & Feats. ISBN 0-900424-56-7.  ^ "Surrey Iron Railway 200th – 26th July 2003". Early Railways. Stephenson Locomotive Society. Retrieved 19 September.  Check date values in: |access-date= (help) ^ Skempton, A.W. (2002). A biographical dictionary of civil engineers in Great Britain and Ireland, John Birkinshaw. pp. 59–60. ISBN 978-0-7277-2939-2.  ^ "Richard Trevithick's steam locomotive". Museumwales.ac.uk. 15 December 2008. Retrieved 8 May 2011.  ^ "Steam train anniversary begins". BBC. 21 February 2004. Retrieved 8 May 2011. A south Wales town has begun months of celebrations to mark the 200th anniversary of the invention of the steam locomotive. Merthyr Tydfil was the location where, on 21 February 1804, Richard Trevithick took the world into the railway age when he set one of his high-pressure steam engines on a local iron master's tram rails  ^ Payton, Philip (2004). Oxford Dictionary of National Biography. Oxford University Press.  ^ Chartres, J. "Richard Trevithick". In Cannon, John. Oxford Companion to British History. p. 932.  ^ "Early Days of Mumbles Railway". BBC. 15 February 2007. Retrieved 19 September 2007.  ^ "John Blenkinsop". Encyclopædia Britannica. Retrieved 8 May 2011.  ^ a b Ellis, Hamilton (1968). The Pictorial Encyclopedia of Railways. Hamlyn Publishing Group.  ^ "Liverpool and Manchester". Retrieved 19 September 2007.  ^ Wolmar, Christian (2009). "Joining up Europe". Blood iron and gold: how the railways transformed the World. Atlantic Books. p. 94. ISBN 978-1-84887-170-0.  ^ "The History of the Tom Thumb – Peter Cooper". Inventors.about.com. Retrieved 8 May 2011.  ^ Storey, Steve. "Charleston & Hamburg Railroad". Railga.com. Retrieved 8 May 2011.  ^ Dilts, James D. (1996). The Great Road: The Building of the Baltimore and Ohio, the Nation's First Railroad, 1828–1853. Palo Alto, CA: Stanford University Press. p. 26. ISBN 978-0-8047-2629-0.  ^ "The Journal of Ebenezer Mattoon Chamberlain 1832-5", Indiana Magazine of History, Vol. XV, September 1919, No. 3, p.233ff. ^ Wolmar (2009) p.xiii. ^ Ambrose, Stephen E. (2000). Nothing Like It In The World; The men who built the Transcontinental Railroad 1863–1869. Simon & Schuster. ISBN 0-684-84609-8.  ^ Tokle, Bjørn (2003). Communication gjennom 100 år (in Norwegian). Meldal: Chr. Salvesen & Chr. Thams's Communications Aktieselskab. p. 54.  ^ a b c EuDaly, Kevin; et al. (2009). The Complete Book of North American Railroading. Minneapolis: Voyageur Press. ISBN 978-0-7603-2848-4. OCLC 209631579.  ^ a b c d e f g h i j American Railway Engineering and Maintenance of Way Association Committee 24 – Education and Training. (2003). Practical Guide to Railway Engineering. AREMA, 2nd Ed. ^ "French train breaks speed record". CNN. Associated Press. 4 April 2007. Archived from the original on 7 April 2007. Retrieved 3 April 2007.  ^ Fouquet, Helene and Viscousi, Gregory (3 April 2007). "French TGV Sets Record, Reaching 357 Miles an Hour (Update2)". Bloomberg L.P. Retrieved 8 May 2011.  CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list (link) ^ "Environmental Issues". The Environmental Blog. 3 April 2007. Retrieved 10 Oct 2010.  ^ "The Inception of the English Railway Station". Architectural History (SAHGB Publications Limited) 4: 63–76. 1961. doi:10.2307/1568245. JSTOR 1568245.  ^ "About Us".  ^ "EU Technical Report 2007".  ^ "Statistics database for transports". http://epp.eurostat.ec.europa.eu (statistical database). Eurostat, European Commission. 20 April 2014. Retrieved 12 May 2014.  External link in |website= (help) ^ Vojtech Eksler, ed. (5 May 2013). "Intermediate report on the development of railway safety in the European Union 2013" (PDF). http://www.era.europa.eu (report). Safety Unit, European Railway Agency & European Union. p. 1. Retrieved 12 May 2014.  External link in |website= (help) ^ American Association of Railroads. "Railroad Fuel Efficiency Sets New Record". Retrieved 12 April 2009.  ^ Publicada por João Pimentel Ferreira. "Carro ou comboio?". Veraveritas.eu. Retrieved 2015-01-03.  ^ "Public Transportation Ridership Statistics". American Public Transportation Association. 2007. Archived from the original on 15 August 2007. Retrieved 10 September 2007.  ^ "New height of world's railway born in Tibet". Xinhua News Agency. 24 August 2005. Retrieved 8 May 2011.  ^ Schivelbusch, G. (1986) The Railway Journey: Industrialization and Perception of Time and Space in the 19th Century. Oxford: Berg. ^ Hong Kong Information Services Department of the Hong Kong SAR Government. Hong Kong 2009 ^ Hau H., Yun-feng G., Zhi-gang, L., Xiao-guang, Y. (2010). Effect of Integrated Multi-Modal Transit Information on Modal Shift. Intelligent Transportation Systems (ITSC), 2010 13th International IEEE Conference. 1753-1757pg. ^ Nishida, M., The Shinkansen High-Speed Rail Network of Japan. Proceedings of an IIASA Conference, June 27–30, 1977. ^ Lewandowski, Krzysztof (2015). "New coefficients of rail transport usage" (PDF). International Journal of Engineering and Innovative Technology (IJEIT) 5 (6): 89–91. ISSN 2277-3754.  ^ Squires, G. Ed. (2002) Urban Sprawl: Causes, Consequences, & Policy Responses. The Urban Institute Press. ^ Puentes, R. (2008). A Bridge to Somewhere: Rethinking American Transportation for the 21st Century. Brookings Institution Metropolitan Policy Report: Blueprint for American Prosperity series report. ^ Firzli, M. Nicolas J. (1 July 2013). "Transportation Infrastructure and Country Attractiveness". Revue Analyse Financière (Paris). Retrieved 26 April 2014.  ^ "FY15 Budget, Business Plan 2015" (PDF).  ^ a b c d "ANNEX to Proposal for a Regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council amending Regulation (EC) No 1370/2007 concerning the opening of the market for domestic passenger transport services by rail" (PDF) (COMMISSION STAFF WORKING DOCUMENT: IMPACT ASSESSMENT). Brussels: European Commission. 2013. pp. 6, 44, 45. 2008 data is not provided for Italy, so 2007 data is used instead  ^ "German Railway Financing" (PDF). p. 2.  ^ "Efficiency indicators of Railways in France" (PDF).  ^ "The age of the train" (PDF).  ^ "Spanish railways battle profit loss with more investment". 17 September 2015. Retrieved 10 March 2016.  ^ "GB rail industry financial information 2014-15" (PDF). Retrieved 9 March 2016. £3.5 billion  ^ "Kosten und Finanzierung des Verkehrs Strasse und Schiene 2012" (PDF) (in German). Neuchâtel, Switzerland: Swiss Federal Statistical Office. 10 December 2015. pp. 6, 9, 11. Retrieved 2015-12-20. 4.578 billion Swiss francs  ^ "ProRail report 2015" (PDF). p. 30.  ^ "The evolution of public funding to the rail sector in 5 European countries - a comparison" (PDF). p. 6.  ^ a b "European rail study report" (PDF). pp. 44, 45. Includes both "Railway subsidies" and "Public Service Obligations".  ^ "Govt support for rail sector makes sense".  ^ Praveen Patil. "Rail Budget And The Perpetuity Of Indian Socialism".  ^ "Govt defends fare hike, says rail subsidy burden was too heavy".  ^ "Government support for Russian Railways".  Notes[edit] ^ According to this source, railways are the safest on both a per-mile and per-hour basis, whereas air transport is safe only on a per-mile basis External links[edit] Wikiquote has quotations related to: Rail transport Wikimedia Commons has media related to Railroad. Look up railway in Wiktionary, the free dictionary. Wikivoyage has a travel guide for Rail travel. v t e Public transport Bus service Bus list Bus rapid transit Charabanc Express bus Guided bus Intercity bus driver Open top bus Public light bus Rail replacement bus Shuttle bus Transit bus Trolleybus Rail Cable car Commuter rail Funicular Heavy rail Heritage railway Heritage streetcar High-speed rail Horsecar Inter-city rail Interurban Light rail Medium-capacity rail transport system Monorail Rapid transit Regional rail Rubber-tyred metro Street running Tram Tram-train Vehicles for hire Auto rickshaw Boda-boda Cycle rickshaw Gondola Hackney carriage Limousine Motorcycle taxi Paratransit Personal rapid transit Pulled rickshaw Share taxi Taxicab Carpooling Car jockey Flexible carpooling Real-time ridesharing Slugging Vanpool Ship Cable ferry Ferry Hovercraft Hydrofoil Ocean liner Water taxi Other transport Aerial tramway Airline Airliner Bicycle-sharing Carsharing Elevator Escalator Gondola lift Horse-drawn vehicle Maglev Moving walkway People mover Trackless train Locations Airport Bus bulb Bus garage (bus depot) Bus lane Bus stand Bus station Bus stop Bus terminus Bus turnout (bus bay) Circle route Cross-city route Dry dock Hangar Harbor Interchange station Kassel kerb Layover Metro station Park and ride Port Queue jump Radial route Taxicab stand Train station Tram stop Transit mall Transport hub Transport network Ticketing and fares Automated fare collection Bus advertising Contract of carriage Dead mileage Exit fare Fare avoidance Fare evasion Farebox recovery ratio Free public transport Free travel pass Integrated ticketing Manual fare collection Money train Paid area Proof-of-payment Reduced fare program Smart cards Ticket machine Transfer Transit pass Facilities Checked baggage First class Sleeper Standing passenger Travel class Scheduling Bus bunching Clock-face scheduling Headway On-time performance Public transport timetable Short turn Other topics Airport security Boarding Crush load Destination sign Hail and ride Network length Non-revenue track Prohibited activities Rail subsidies Request stop Passenger load factor Security Transit district Transit map Transit police Transit-oriented development (TOD) Transportation authority v t e Railway track layouts Running lines Single track Passing loop Double track Quadruple track Crossover Rail sidings Balloon loop Headshunt Refuge siding Rail yard Classification yard Junctions Flying junction Level junction Double junction Facing and trailing Grand union Wye Switch / turnout / points Swingnose crossing Level crossing Stations Railway platform Side platform Island platform Bay platform Split platform Terminal station Balloon loop Spanish solution Cross-platform interchange Interchange station Hillclimbing Horseshoe curve Zig Zag / Switchback Spiral Track geometry Track gauge Ruling gradient Minimum curve radius Cant Cant deficiency v t e Railway infrastructure Permanent way Permanent way (history) Permanent way (current) Railroad tie/Sleeper Rail fastening system Track ballast Rail profile Fishplate Breather switch Datenail Axe ties Ladder track Baulk road Cant Minimum radius Track transition curve Clip and scotch Trackwork and track structures Junction Wye Railroad switch Gauntlet track Railway electrification system Third rail Overhead lines Guide bar Track gauge Track geometry Railway turntable Water crane Track pan Rail track Tramway track Classification yard Rail yard Siding Passing loop Balloon loop Headshunt Refuge siding Dual gauge Roll way Signalling and safety Derail Railway signalling Signalling control Wayside horn Railway signal Interlocking Level crossing Buffer stop Catch points Loading gauge Structure gauge Block post Train stop Signal bridge Buildings Railway station Station building Railway station layout Station clock Train shed Goods shed Motive power depot Roundhouse Railway platform Authority control GND: 4052371-8 Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Rail_transport&oldid=719083668" Categories: Rail transport Trains Transportation engineering Hidden categories: CS1 German-language sources (de) CS1 errors: dates CS1 Norwegian-language sources (no) CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list CS1 errors: external links Articles that mention track gauge 1435 mm All articles with failed verification Articles with failed verification from February 2012 Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from July 2015 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from October 2013 Articles with unsourced statements from February 2016 Articles with unsourced statements from July 2012 Use dmy dates from February 2011 Wikipedia articles with GND identifiers Articles in Wikipedia Primary School Project SSAJRP Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Article Talk Variants Views Read Edit View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Featured content Current events Random article Donate to Wikipedia Wikipedia store Interaction Help About Wikipedia Community portal Recent changes Contact page Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Cite this page Print/export Create a book Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Languages العربية Azərbaycanca Беларуская Български Čeština Deutsch Eesti فارسی Հայերեն Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ქართული Қазақша മലയാളം मराठी مصرى Монгол Nederlands नेपाल भाषा Олык марий Oʻzbekcha/ўзбекча Polski Português Русский Shqip Sicilianu Slovenčina Slovenščina Suomi Tagalog தமிழ் ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt 粵語 中文 Тыва дыл Edit links This page was last modified on 7 May 2016, at 14:27. Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view