Rail transport operations - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Rail transport operations From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to: navigation, search This article does not cite any sources. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (December 2009) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) Part of a series on Rail transport Operations Track Maintenance High-speed railways Track gauge Stations Trains Locomotives Rolling stock Companies History Attractions Terminology (AU, NA, NZ, UK) By country Accidents Railway couplings Couplers by country Coupler conversion Variable gauge Gauge conversion Dual gauge Wheelset Bogie (truck) Dual coupling Rail subsidies Modelling v t e A railway has two major components: the rolling stock (the locomotives, passenger coaches, freight cars, etc.) and the infrastructure (the permanent way, tracks, stations, freight facilities, viaducts, tunnels, etc.). Contents 1 Operation 2 Intrinsic factors 2.1 Signalling 2.2 Types of rail system 2.3 Permanent way and railroad construction 2.4 Types of vehicle 2.5 Passenger operations 2.6 Freight operations 2.7 Locomotive operations 2.8 Maintenance of way operations 3 Background factors (feasibility) 4 Extrinsic factors 4.1 Physical geography 4.2 Human geography 4.3 Historical factors Operation[edit] Two British Rail Class 143 DMUs at Cardiff Queen Street station in the United Kingdom. Both trains are operated by Arriva Trains Wales. The operation of the railway is through a system of control, originally by mechanical means, but nowadays more usually electronic and computerized. Intrinsic factors[edit] Signalling[edit] Main article: Railway signalling Signalling systems used to control the movement of traffic may be either of fixed block or moving block variety. Fixed block signalling Most blocks are 'fixed' blocks, i.e. they delineate a section of track between two defined points. On timetable, train order, and token-based systems, blocks usually start and end at selected stations. On signalling-based systems, blocks usually start and end at signals. Alternatively, cab signalling may be in use. The lengths of blocks are designed to allow trains to operate as frequently as necessary. A lightly used branch line might have blocks many kilometres long, whilst a busy commuter railway might have blocks a few hundred metres long. Moving block signalling A disadvantage of fixed blocks is that the faster trains are permitted to run, the longer the stopping distance, and therefore the longer the blocks need to be. This decreases a line's capacity. With moving block, computers are used to calculate a 'safe zone', behind each moving train, which no other train may enter. The system depends on precise knowledge of where each train is and how fast it is moving. With moving block, lineside signals are not provided, and instructions are passed direct to the trains. It has the advantage of increasing track capacity by allowing trains to run much closer together. Types of rail system[edit] Most rail systems serve a number of functions on the same track, carrying local, long distance and commuter passenger trains, and freight trains. The emphasis on each varies by country. Some urban rail transit, rapid transit and light rail systems are isolated from the national system in the cities they serve. Some freight lines serving mines are also isolated, and these are usually owned by the mine company. An industrial railway is a specialized rail system used inside factories or mines. Steep grade railways are usually isolated, with special safety systems. Permanent way and railroad construction[edit] Main articles: Permanent way and Railroad construction The permanent way trails through the physical geography. The tracks' geometry is limited by the physical geography. Types of vehicle[edit] Main articles: Train, Locomotive and Railroad car Trains are pushed/pulled by one or more locomotive units. Two or more locomotives coupled in multiple traction are frequently used in freight trains. Railroad cars or rolling stock consist of passenger cars, freight cars, maintenance cars and in America cabooses. Modern passenger trains sometimes are pushed/pulled by a tail and head unit (see top and tail), of which not both need to be motorised or running. Many passenger trains consist of multiple units with motors mounted beneath the passenger cars. Passenger operations[edit] The Secunderabad Railway Station is one of the busiest stations of Indian Railways Most public transport passenger operations happen in the train station and in the passenger car. The passenger buys a ticket, either in the station, or on the train (sometimes at a higher fare). There are generally speaking two ways of validating a ticket: The first way is for the passenger to validate the ticket himself (by perforating it, for instance) which is randomly checked by a ticket controller. This method is sometimes referred to as Proof-of-payment and is used extensively on one-man operated rail and bus lines. The second way is for a conductor to check all persons on the train for valid tickets and devaluating them, so they cannot be used again. Some passenger cars, especially in long distance high speed trains have a restaurant or bar. These need to be catered. In recent times, train catering has been diminished somewhat by vending machines in the train station or on the train. When not in use, passenger cars are stored, maintained and repaired in coach yards. Freight operations[edit] Main article: Freight train Freight or cargo trains are loaded and unloaded in intermodal terminals (also called container freight stations or freight terminals), and at customer locations (e.g. mines, grain elevators, factories). Intermodal freight transport uses standardized containers, which are handled by cranes. Along their routes, freight trains are routed through rail yards to sort cars and assemble trains for their final destinations, as well as for equipment maintenance, refueling, and crew changes. Within a freight yard, trains are composed in a classification yard. Switcher or shunter locomotives help the composing. A unit train (also called a block train), which carries a block of cars all of the same origin and destination, does not get sorted in a classification yard, but may stop in a freight yard for inspection, engine servicing and/or crew changes. Combining freight and passenger operations on a single track with passing loops poses operational problems, because of the different demands of freight operators and public transport. In many smaller countries passenger operations are done during the day, while freight trains operate mostly during the night.[citation needed] Dedicated tracks have been assigned to some operations.[citation needed] Locomotive operations[edit] When inactive, locomotives are housed in a locomotive depot (UK term) or engine house (US). In engine facilities, or a Traction Maintenance Depot, locomotives are cleaned, repaired, etc. Decommissioned locomotives are sometimes used to heat passenger cars and defrost railroad switches in winter. After this period, locomotives (and other rail vehicles) are turned into scrap or are left to rust in a train depot. Some end up in railway museums or are bought by railway preservation groups. Steam locomotives are housed in a circular train depot, a roundhouse that surrounds a turntable. Maintenance of way operations[edit] Main article: Work train The presence of a work train on a given section of track will temporarily decrease the capacity of the route. The normal method in such operations is to cease other traffic altogether during the track 'occupation'. Services may be diverted by an alternative route, if available; alternatively, passenger services may be maintained using a replacement bus service. It is therefore more economically viable to plan such track occupations for periods of reduced usage (e.g. 'off-peak', overnight or holiday times) to minimise the impact on normal services and revenue. Background factors (feasibility)[edit] Freight wagons await unloading Each transport system represents a contribution to a country's infrastructure, and as such must make economic sense or eventually close. From this, each has a particular role or roles. These may change with time but they affect the specifications of each particular system. Extrinsic factors[edit] Rail transport systems are built into the landscape, including both the physical geography (hills, valleys, etc.) and the human geography (location of settlements). The rail transport system may in turn feedback into the human geography. Physical geography[edit] The permanent way of a system must pass through the geography and geology of its region. This may be flat or mountainous, may include obstacles such as water and mountains. These determine, in part, the intrinsic nature of the system. The slope at which trains run must also be calculated correctly. In this stage, it is decided where tunnels pass. Human geography[edit] Rail transport systems affect the human geography. Large cities (such as Nairobi) may be founded by a railroad passing through. Historically, when a station has been built outside the town or city it is intended to serve, that town has expanded to include the station, or buildings (especially Inns) sprung up near the station. The existence of a station may increase the number of commuters who live in a town or village and so cause it to become a dormitory town. The transcontinental railroad was a large factor in American colonization of the Western frontier. China's railroad expansion into Tibet may have similar consequences. Historical factors[edit] Rail transport systems are often used for purposes they were not designed for, but have evolved into due to changes in human geography. Politics can play a large part in decisions about railways, such as the Beeching Axe. In the UK, building or rebuilding a railway usually requires an Act of Parliament. In many countries, rail subsidies allow unprofitable, but socially desirable, railways to continue to operate. Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Rail_transport_operations&oldid=717447811" Categories: Rail transport operations Hidden categories: Articles lacking sources from December 2009 All articles lacking sources All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from January 2011 Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Article Talk Variants Views Read Edit View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Featured content Current events Random article Donate to Wikipedia Wikipedia store Interaction Help About Wikipedia Community portal Recent changes Contact page Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Cite this page Print/export Create a book Download as PDF Printable version Languages Deutsch Français Bahasa Melayu Polski Português Русский Українська Edit links This page was last modified on 27 April 2016, at 19:31. Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view