Arthur Wellesley, 1st Duke of Wellington - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Arthur Wellesley, 1st Duke of Wellington From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to: navigation, search "Duke of Wellington" and "The Iron Duke" redirect here. For subsequent dukes, see Duke of Wellington (title). For the ship, see HMS Duke of Wellington. For other ships, see HMS Iron Duke. For the film, see The Iron Duke (film). For the pub, see The Duke of Wellington, Marylebone. Field Marshal His Grace The Duke of Wellington KG GCB GCH PC FRS The Duke of Wellington, by Sir Thomas Lawrence. Painted c. 1815–16, after the Battle of Waterloo.[1] Prime Minister of the United Kingdom In office 14 November 1834 – 10 December 1834 Monarch William IV Preceded by The Viscount Melbourne Succeeded by Sir Robert Peel In office 22 January 1828 – 16 November 1830 Monarch George IV William IV Preceded by The Viscount Goderich Succeeded by The Earl Grey Leader of the House of Lords In office 3 September 1841 – 27 June 1846 Prime Minister Sir Robert Peel Preceded by The Viscount Melbourne Succeeded by The Marquess of Lansdowne In office 14 November 1834 – 18 April 1835 Prime Minister Sir Robert Peel Preceded by The Viscount Melbourne Succeeded by The Viscount Melbourne In office 22 January 1828 – 22 November 1830 Preceded by The Viscount Goderich Succeeded by The Earl Grey Foreign Secretary In office 14 November 1834 – 18 April 1835 Prime Minister Sir Robert Peel Preceded by The Viscount Palmerston Succeeded by The Viscount Palmerston Home Secretary In office 17 November 1834 – 15 December 1834 Preceded by The Viscount Duncannon Succeeded by Henry Goulburn Secretary of State for War and the Colonies In office 17 November 1834 – 9 December 1834 Preceded by Thomas Spring Rice Succeeded by The Earl of Aberdeen Personal details Born Arthur Wesley 1 May 1769 6 Merrion Street, Dublin, County Dublin, Ireland[2] Died 14 September 1852(1852-09-14) (aged 83) Walmer Castle, Kent, England Resting place St Paul's Cathedral, London Political party Tory (until 1834), Conservative (1834 onward) Spouse(s) Catherine Pakenham Children Arthur Charles Religion Church of Ireland Signature Military service Allegiance United Kingdom Service/branch British Army Years of service 1787–1852 Rank Field Marshal Commands Commander-in-Chief of the British Army Battles/wars Flanders Campaign Fourth Anglo-Mysore War Second Anglo-Maratha War English Wars Peninsular War Waterloo campaign Awards Knight of the Order of the Garter Knight Grand Cross of the Order of the Bath Knight Grand Cross of the Royal Guelphic Order Knight Grand Cross of the Order of the Sword Knight of the Golden Fleece Knight Grand Cross of the Military William Order[3] Field Marshal Arthur Wellesley, 1st Duke of Wellington, KG, GCB, GCH, PC, FRS (1 May 1769 – 14 September 1852), was an Anglo-Irish soldier and statesman, and one of the leading military and political figures of 19th-century Britain. His defeat of Napoleon at the Battle of Waterloo in 1815 put him in the top rank of Britain's military heroes. In 2002, he was number 14 in the BBC's poll of the 100 Greatest Britons. Wellesley was born in Dublin, belonging to the Protestant Ascendancy in Ireland. He was commissioned as an ensign in the British Army in 1787, serving in Ireland as aide-de-camp to two successive Lords Lieutenant of Ireland. He was also elected as a Member of Parliament in the Irish House of Commons. He was a colonel by 1796, and saw action in the Netherlands and in India, where he fought in the Fourth Anglo-Mysore War at the Battle of Seringapatam. He was appointed governor of Seringapatam and Mysore in 1799 and, as a newly appointed major-general, won a decisive victory over the Maratha Confederacy at the Battle of Assaye in 1803. Wellesley rose to prominence as a general during the Peninsular campaign of the Napoleonic Wars, and was promoted to the rank of field marshal after leading the allied forces to victory against the French at the Battle of Vitoria in 1813. Following Napoleon's exile in 1814, he served as the ambassador to France and was granted a dukedom. During the Hundred Days in 1815, he commanded the allied army which defeated Napoleon at Waterloo, together with a Prussian army under Blücher. Wellesley's battle record is exemplary; he ultimately participated in some 60 battles during the course of his military career. Wellesley is famous for his adaptive defensive style of warfare, resulting in several victories against a numerically superior force while minimising his own losses. He is regarded as one of the greatest defensive commanders of all time, and many of his tactics and battle plans are still studied in military academies around the world. After ending his active military career, Wellesley returned to politics. He was twice British prime minister as part of the Tory party: from 1828 to 1830, and for a little less than a month in 1834. He oversaw the passage of the Catholic Relief Act 1829, but opposed the Reform Act 1832. He continued as one of the leading figures in the House of Lords until his retirement and remained Commander-in-Chief of the British Army until his death. Contents 1 Early life and education 2 Military career 2.1 Early career 2.2 Netherlands 2.3 India 2.3.1 Fourth Anglo-Mysore War 2.3.1.1 Seringapatam 2.3.2 Second Anglo-Maratha War 2.3.2.1 Assaye 2.3.2.2 Argaum and Gawilghur 2.3.3 Leaving India 2.4 Back in Britain 2.5 War on Denmark 2.6 To the Peninsula 2.7 Peninsular War 2.7.1 1808 2.7.2 1809 2.7.3 1810 2.7.4 1811 2.7.5 1812 2.7.6 1813 2.7.7 Aftermath 2.8 Waterloo campaign 2.8.1 Battle 2.8.2 Controversy 3 Political career 3.1 Prime Minister 3.2 Catholic Emancipation 3.3 The Reform Act 3.4 Jewish emancipation 3.5 Conservative government 4 Family 5 Retirement 5.1 Death and funeral 6 Personality 7 Meeting Lord Nelson 8 Wellesley/Wesley and Colley/Cowley heritage 9 Titles and tributes 10 Nicknames 10.1 The Iron Duke 11 See also 12 Notes 13 References 14 Further reading 14.1 Primary sources 15 External links Early life and education[edit] Wellesley spent much of his early childhood at his family house in Dangan Castle, engraving 1842. Wellesley was born into an aristocratic Anglo-Irish family in the Kingdom of Ireland as the Honourable Arthur Wesley,[2] the third of five surviving sons (fourth otherwise) to the 1st Earl of Mornington and his wife Anne, eldest daughter of the 1st Viscount Dungannon. As such, he belonged to the Protestant Ascendancy.[4] His biographers mostly follow the contemporary newspaper evidence in saying that he was born 1 May 1769,[5] the day that he was baptised.[6] His birthplace is uncertain. He was most likely born at his parents' townhouse, 24 Upper Merrion Street, Dublin, now the Merrion Hotel.[7] But his mother Anne, Countess of Mornington, recalled in 1815 that he had been born at 6 Merrion Street, Dublin.[8] Other places have been put forward as the location of his birth, including Mornington House (the house next door on Upper Merrion), as his father had asserted; the Dublin packet boat;[9] and the mansion in the family estate of Athy (consumed in the fires of 1916), as the Duke apparently put on his 1851 census return.[10] He spent most of his childhood at his family's two homes, the first a large house in Dublin and the second Dangan Castle, 3 miles (5 km) north of Summerhill on the Trim Road in County Meath.[11] In 1781, Arthur's father died and his eldest brother Richard inherited his father's earldom.[12] He went to the diocesan school in Trim when at Dangan, Mr Whyte's Academy when in Dublin, and Brown's School in Chelsea when in London. He then enrolled at Eton, where he studied from 1781 to 1784.[12] His loneliness there caused him to hate it, and makes it highly unlikely that he actually said, "The Battle of Waterloo was won on the playing fields of Eton," a quotation which is often attributed to him. Moreover, Eton had no playing fields at the time. In 1785, a lack of success at Eton, combined with a shortage of family funds due to his father's death, forced the young Wellesley and his mother to move to Brussels.[13] Until his early twenties, Arthur showed little sign of distinction and his mother grew increasingly concerned at his idleness, stating, "I don't know what I shall do with my awkward son Arthur."[13] A year later, Arthur enrolled in the French Royal Academy of Equitation in Angers, where he progressed significantly, becoming a good horseman and learning French, which later proved very useful.[14] Upon returning to England in late 1786, he astonished his mother with his improvement.[15] Military career[edit] Early career[edit] Beginning in 1787, Wellesley served at Dublin Castle (pictured) as aide-de-camp to two successive Lords Lieutenant of Ireland. Despite his new promise he had yet to find a job and his family was still short of money, so upon the advice of his mother, his brother Richard asked his friend The 4th Duke of Rutland (then Lord Lieutenant of Ireland) to consider Arthur for a commission in the army.[15] Soon after, on 7 March 1787 he was gazetted ensign in the 73rd Regiment of Foot.[16][17] In October, with the assistance of his brother, he was assigned as aide-de-camp, on ten shillings a day (twice his pay as an ensign), to the new Lord Lieutenant of Ireland Lord Buckingham.[16] He was also transferred to the new 76th Regiment forming in Ireland and on Christmas Day, 1787, was promoted to lieutenant.[16][18] During his time in Dublin his duties were mainly social; attending balls, entertaining guests and providing advice to Buckingham. While in Ireland, he overextended himself in borrowing due to his occasional gambling, but in his defence stated that "I have often known what it was to be in want of money, but I have never got helplessly into debt".[19] On 23 January 1788, he transferred into the 41st Regiment of Foot, then again on 25 June 1789, still a lieutenant, he transferred to the 12th (Prince of Wales's) Regiment of (Light) Dragoons[20] and, according to military historian Richard Holmes, he also dipped a reluctant toe into politics.[19] Shortly before the general election of 1789, he went to the "rotten borough" of Trim to speak against the granting of the title "Freeman" of Dublin to the parliamentary leader of the Irish Patriot Party, Henry Grattan.[21] Succeeding, he was later nominated and duly elected as a Member of Parliament for Trim in the Irish House of Commons.[22] Because of the limited suffrage at the time, he sat in a parliament where at least two-thirds of the members owed their election to the landowners of fewer than a hundred boroughs.[22] Wellesley continued to serve at Dublin Castle, voting with the government in the Irish parliament over the next two years. On 30 January 1791 he became a captain and was transferred to the 58th Regiment of Foot.[22][23][24] On 31 October, he transferred to the 18th Light Dragoons[25] and it was during this period that he grew increasingly attracted to Kitty Pakenham, the daughter of Edward Pakenham, 2nd Baron Longford.[26] She was described as being full of 'gaiety and charm'.[27] In 1793, he sought her hand, but was turned down by her brother Thomas, Earl of Longford, who considered Wellesley to be a young man, in debt, with very poor prospects.[28] An aspiring amateur musician, Wellesley, devastated by the rejection, burnt his violins in anger, and resolved to pursue a military career in earnest.[29] He became a major by purchase in the 33rd Regiment in 1793.[26][30] A few months later, in September, his brother lent him more money and with it he purchased a lieutenant-colonelcy in the 33rd.[31][32] Netherlands[edit] Further information: Flanders Campaign Lieutenant Colonel Arthur Wellesley, aged c. 26, in the 33rd Regiment. In 1793, the Duke of York was sent to Flanders in command of the British contingent of an allied force destined for the invasion of France. In June 1794, Wellesley with the 33rd regiment set sail from Cork bound for Ostend as part of an expedition bringing reinforcements for the army in Flanders. They arrived too late and joined the Duke of York as he was pulling back towards the Netherlands. On 15 September 1794, at the Battle of Boxtel,[33] east of Breda, Wellington, in temporary command of his brigade, had his first experience of battle. During General Abercromby’s withdrawal in the face of superior French forces, the 33rd held off enemy cavalry, allowing neighbouring units to retreat safely. During the extremely harsh winter that followed, Wellesley and his regiment formed part of an allied force holding the defence line along the Waal River. The 33rd, along with the rest of the army, suffered heavy losses from sickness and exposure. Wellesley’s health was also affected by the damp environment.[34] Though the campaign was to end disastrously, with the British army driven out of the United Provinces into Germany, Wellesley was to learn several valuable lessons, including the use of steady lines of infantry against advancing columns and of the merits of supporting sea-power.[33] He understood that the failure of the campaign was due in part to the faults of the leaders and the poor organisation at headquarters.[35] He remarked later of his time in the Netherlands that "At least I learned what not to do, and that is always a valuable lesson".[35] Returning to England in March 1795, he was returned as a Member of Parliament for Trim for a second time.[36] He hoped to be given the position of secretary of war in the new Irish government but the new lord-lieutenant, Lord Camden, was only able to offer him the post of Surveyor-General of the Ordnance.[36] Declining the post, he returned to his regiment, now at Southampton preparing to set sail for the West Indies. After seven weeks at sea, a storm forced the fleet back to Poole, England.[36] The 33rd was given time to recuperate and a few months later, Whitehall decided to send the regiment to India. Wellesley was promoted full colonel by seniority on 3 May 1796[37] and a few weeks later set sail for Calcutta with his regiment.[38] India[edit] Arriving in Calcutta in February 1797 he spent several months there, before being sent on a brief expedition to the Philippines, where he established a list of new hygiene precautions for his men to deal with the unfamiliar climate.[39] Returning in November to India, he learnt that his elder brother Richard, now known as Lord Mornington, had been appointed as the new Governor-General of India.[40] In 1798, he changed the spelling of his surname to "Wellesley"; up to this time he was still known as Wesley, which his eldest brother considered the ancient and proper spelling.[40][41] Fourth Anglo-Mysore War[edit] Main article: Fourth Anglo-Mysore War Wellesley in India, wearing his major-general's uniform, 1804. As part of the campaign to extend the rule of the British East India Company, the Fourth Anglo-Mysore War broke out in 1798 against the Sultan of Mysore, Tipu Sultan.[42] Arthur's brother Richard ordered that an armed force be sent to capture Seringapatam and defeat Tipu. Under the command of General Harris, some 24,000 troops were dispatched to Madras (to join an equal force being sent from Bombay in the west).[43] Arthur and the 33rd sailed to join them in August.[44] After extensive and careful logistic preparation (which would become one of Wellesley's main attributes)[45] the 33rd left with the main force in December and travelled across 250 miles (402 km) of jungle from Madras to Mysore.[45] On account of his brother, during the journey, Wellesley was given an additional command, that of chief advisor to the Nizam of Hyderabad's army (sent to accompany the British force).[43] This position was to cause friction among many of the senior officers (some of whom were senior to Wellesley).[46] Much of this friction was put to rest after the Battle of Mallavelly, some 20 miles (32 km) from Seringapatam, in which Harris's army attacked a large part of the sultan's army. During the battle, Wellesley led his men, in a line of battle of two ranks, against the enemy to a gentle ridge and gave the order to fire.[47] After an extensive repetition of volleys, followed by a bayonet charge, the 33rd, in conjunction with the rest of Harris's force, forced Tipu's infantry to retreat.[47] Seringapatam[edit] Immediately after their arrival at Seringapatam on 5 April 1799, the Battle of Seringapatam began and Wellesley was ordered to lead a night attack on the village of Sultanpettah, adjacent to the fortress to clear the way for the artillery.[48] Because of the enemy's strong defensive preparations, and the darkness, with the resulting confusion, the attack failed with 25 casualties. Wellesley suffered a minor injury to his knee from a spent musket-ball.[49][50] Although they would re-attack successfully the next day, after time to scout ahead the enemy's positions, the affair had an impact on Wellesley. He resolved "never to attack an enemy who is preparing and strongly posted, and whose posts have not been reconnoitered by daylight".[51] Major-General Wellesley, meeting with Nawab Azim al-Daula, 1805. Lewin Bentham Bowring gives this alternative account: One of these groves, called the Sultanpet Tope, was intersected by deep ditches, watered from a channel running in an easterly direction about a mile from the fort. General Baird was directed to scour this grove and dislodge the enemy, but on his advancing with this object on the night of the 5th, he found the tope unoccupied. The next day, however, the Mysore troops again took possession of the ground, and as it was absolutely necessary to expel them, two columns were detached at sunset for the purpose. The first of these, under Colonel Shawe, got possession of a ruined village, which it successfully held. The second column, under Colonel Wellesley, on advancing into the tope, was at once attacked in the darkness of night by a tremendous fire of musketry and rockets. The men, floundering about amidst the trees and the water-courses, at last broke, and fell back in disorder, some being killed and a few taken prisoners. In the confusion Colonel Wellesley was himself struck on the knee by a spent ball, and narrowly escaped falling into the hands of the enemy.[52] General Wellesley's House, Mysore (1890s), unknown photographer, from the Curzon Collection's 'Souvenir of Mysore Album'[53] A few weeks later, after extensive artillery bombardment, a breach was opened in the main walls of the fortress of Seringapatam.[51] An attack led by Major-General Baird secured the fortress. Wellesley secured the rear of the advance, posting guards at the breach and then stationed his regiment at the main palace.[54] After hearing news of the death of the Tipu Sultan, Wellesley was the first at the scene to confirm his death, checking his pulse.[55] Over the coming day, Wellesley grew increasingly concerned over the lack of discipline among his men, who drank and pillaged the fortress and city. To restore order, several soldiers were flogged and four hanged.[56] After battle and the resulting end of the war, the main force under General Harris left Seringapatam and Wellesley, aged 30, stayed behind to command the area as the new Governor of Seringapatam and Mysore. He was promoted to brigadier-general on 17 July 1801. He took residence within the Sultan's summer palace and reformed the tax and justice systems in his province to maintain order and prevent bribery.[57] He also hunted down the mercenary and self-proclaimed 'King' Dhoondiah Waugh, who had escaped from prison in Seringapatam during the battle.[58] Wellesley, with command of four regiments, defeated Dhoondiah's larger rebel force, along with Dhoondiah himself who was killed in the battle. He paid for the future upkeep of Dhoondiah's orphaned son.[59] While in India, Wellesley was ill for a considerable time, first with severe diarrhoea from the water and then with fever, followed by a serious skin infection caused by trichophyton.[60] He received good news when in September 1802 he learnt that he had been promoted to the rank of major-general.[61] Wellesley had been gazetted on 29 April 1802, but the news took several months to reach him by sea. He remained at Mysore until November when he was sent to command an army in the Second Anglo-Maratha War.[61] Second Anglo-Maratha War[edit] Main article: Second Anglo-Maratha War When he determined that a long defensive war would ruin his army, Wellesley decided to act boldly to defeat the numerically larger force of the Maratha Empire.[62] With the logistic assembly of his army complete (24,000 men in total) he gave the order to break camp and attack the nearest Maratha fort on 8 August 1803.[61][62] The fort surrendered on 12 August after an infantry attack had exploited an artillery-made breach in the wall. With the fort now in British control Wellesley was able to extend control southwards to the river Godavari.[63] Arthur Wellesley (mounted) at the Battle of Assaye (engraving after W.Heath). Wellesley later remarked that it was his greatest victory.[64] Assaye[edit] Splitting his army into two forces, to pursue and locate the main Marathas army, (the second force, commanded by Colonel Stevenson was far smaller) Wellesley was preparing to rejoin his forces on 24 September. His intelligence, however, reported the location of the Marathas' main army, between two rivers near Assaye.[65] If he waited for the arrival of his second force, the Marathas would be able to mount a retreat, so Wellesley decided to launch an attack immediately.[65] On 23 September, Wellesley led his forces over a ford in the river Kaitna and the Battle of Assaye commenced.[66] After crossing the ford the infantry was reorganised into several lines and advanced against the Maratha infantry. Wellesley ordered his cavalry to exploit the flank of the Maratha army just near the village.[66] During the battle Wellesley himself came under fire; two of his horses were shot from under him and he had to mount a third.[67] At a crucial moment, Wellesley regrouped his forces and ordered Colonel Maxwell (later killed in the attack) to attack the eastern end of the Maratha position while Wellesley himself directed a renewed infantry attack against the centre.[67] An officer in the attack wrote of the importance of Wellesley's personal leadership: "The General was in the thick of the action the whole time ... I never saw a man so cool and collected as he was ... though I can assure you, 'til our troops got the order to advance the fate of the day seemed doubtful ..."[68] With some 6,000 Marathas killed or wounded, the enemy was routed, though Wellesley's force was in no condition to pursue. British casualties were heavy: the British losses were counted as 409 soldiers being killed out of which 164 were Europeans and the remaining 245 were Indian; a further 1,622 British soldiers were wounded and 26 soldiers were reported missing (the British casualty figures were taken from Wellesley's own despatch).[69] Wellesley was troubled by the loss of men and remarked that he hoped "I should not like to see again such loss as I sustained on 23 September, even if attended by such gain".[64] Years later, however, he remarked that Assaye was the best battle he ever fought.[64] Argaum and Gawilghur[edit] Despite the damage done to the Maratha army, the battle did not end the war.[70] A few months later in November, Wellesley attacked a larger force near Argaum, leading his army to victory again, with an astonishing 5,000 enemy dead at the cost of only 361 British casualties.[70] A further successful attack at the fortress at Gawilghur, combined with the victory of General Lake at Delhi forced the Maratha to sign a peace settlement at Anjangaon (not concluded until a year later) called as the Treaty of Surji-Anjangaon.[71] Military historian Richard Holmes remarked that Wellesley's experiences in India had an important influence on his personality and military tactics, teaching him much about military matters that would prove vital to his success in the Peninsular War.[72] These included a strong sense of discipline through drill and order,[73] the use of diplomacy to gain allies, and the vital necessity for a secure supply line. He also established a high regard for the acquisition of intelligence through scouts and spies.[73] His personal tastes also developed, including dressing himself in white trousers, a dark tunic, with Hessian boots and black cocked hat (that later became synonymous as his style).[74] Leaving India[edit] Kitty Pakenham by J. R. Swinton c.1850 from early sketch c.1810 Wellesley had grown tired of his time in India, remarking "I have served as long in India as any man ought who can serve anywhere else".[75] In June 1804 he applied for permission to return home and as a reward for his service in India he was made a Knight of the Bath in September.[75] While in India, Wellesley had amassed a fortune of £42,000 (considerable at the time), consisting mainly of prize money from his campaign.[75] When his brother's term as Governor-General of India ended in March 1805, the brothers returned together to England on HMS Howe. Arthur, coincidentally, stopped on his voyage at the little island of Saint Helena and stayed in the same building to which Napoleon I would later be exiled.[76] Back in Britain[edit] Wellesley then served in the abortive Anglo-Russian expedition to north Germany in 1805, taking a brigade to Elbe.[77] He then took a period of extended leave from the army and was elected as a Tory member of the British parliament for Rye in January 1806.[78][79] A year later, he was elected MP for Newport on the Isle of Wight and was then appointed to serve as Chief Secretary for Ireland, under the Duke of Richmond. At the same time, he was made a privy counsellor.[78] While in Ireland, he gave a verbal promise that the remaining Penal Laws would be enforced with great moderation, perhaps an indication of his later willingness to support Catholic Emancipation.[80] War on Denmark[edit] Wellesley was in Ireland in May 1807 when he heard of the British expedition to Denmark. He decided to go, stepping down from his political appointments and was appointed to command an infantry brigade in the Second Battle of Copenhagen which took place in August. He fought at the Køge, during which the men under his command took 1,500 prisoners, with Wellesley later present during the surrender.[78] By 30 September, he had returned to England and was raised to the rank of lieutenant general on 25 April 1808.[78] In June 1808 he accepted the command of an expedition of 9,000 men. Preparing to sail for an attack on the Spanish colonies in South America (to assist the Latin American patriot Francisco de Miranda) his force was instead ordered to sail for Portugal, to take part in the Peninsular Campaign and rendezvous with 5,000 troops from Gibraltar.[81][82] To the Peninsula[edit] Ready for battle, he left Cork on 12 July 1808 to participate in the war against French forces in the Iberian Peninsula, with his skills as a commander tested and developed.[81] According to the historian Robin Neillands, "Wellesley had by now acquired the experience on which his later successes were founded. He knew about command from the ground up, about the importance of logistics, about campaigning in a hostile environment. He enjoyed political influence and realised the need to maintain support at home. Above all, he had gained a clear idea of how, by setting attainable objectives and relying on his own force and abilities, a campaign could be fought and won."[81] Peninsular War[edit] Main article: Peninsular War Further information: British Army during the Napoleonic Wars and Anglo-Portuguese Army Reenactors of the 33rd Regiment of Foot Wellington's Redcoats who fought in the Napoleonic Wars, 1812–1815, here showing the standard line 8th Company. 1808[edit] Wellesley defeated the French at the Battle of Roliça and the Battle of Vimeiro in 1808[83] but was superseded in command immediately after the latter battle. General Dalrymple then signed the controversial Convention of Sintra, which stipulated that the British Royal Navy transport the French army out of Lisbon with all their loot, and insisted on the association of the only available government minister, Wellesley.[84] Dalrymple and Wellesley were recalled to Britain to face a Court of Enquiry. Wellesley had agreed to sign the preliminary armistice, but had not signed the convention, and was cleared.[85] Meanwhile, Napoleon himself entered Spain with his veteran troops to put down the revolt; the new commander of the British forces in the Peninsula, Sir John Moore, died during the Battle of Corunna in January 1809.[86] Although overall the land war with France was not going well from a British perspective, the Peninsula was the one theatre where they, with the Portuguese, had provided strong resistance against France and her allies. This contrasted with the disastrous Walcheren expedition, which was typical of the mismanaged British operations of the time. Wellesley submitted a memorandum to Lord Castlereagh on the defence of Portugal. He stressed its mountainous frontiers and advocated Lisbon as the main base because the Royal Navy could help to defend it. Castlereagh and the cabinet approved the memo, appointed him head of all British forces in Portugal.[87] 1809[edit] Wellesley arrived in Lisbon on 22 April 1809 onboard HMS Surveillante,[88] after narrowly escaping shipwreck.[89] Reinforced, he took to the offensive. In the Second Battle of Porto he crossed the Douro river in a daylight coup de main, and routed Marshal Soult's French troops in Porto.[90] With Portugal secured, Wellesley advanced into Spain to unite with General Cuesta's forces. The combined allied force prepared for an assault on Victor's I Corps at Talavera, 23 July. Cuesta, however, was reluctant to agree, and was only persuaded to advance on the following day.[91] The delay allowed the French to withdraw, but Cuesta sent his army headlong after Victor, and found himself faced by almost the entire French army in New Castile—Victor had been reinforced by the Toledo and Madrid garrisons. The Spanish retreated precipitously, necessitating the advance of two British divisions to cover their retreat.[92] The next day, 27 July, at the Battle of Talavera the French advanced in three columns and were repulsed several times throughout the day by Wellesley, but at a heavy cost to the British force. In the aftermath Marshal Soult's army was discovered to be advancing south, threatening to cut Wellesley off from Portugal. Wellesley moved east on 3 August to block it, leaving 1,500 wounded in the care of the Spanish,[93] intending to confront Soult before finding out that the French were in fact 30,000 strong. The British commander sent the Light Brigade on a dash to hold the bridge over the Tagus River at Almaraz. With communications and supply from Lisbon secured for now, Wellesley considered joining with Cuesta again but found out that his Spanish ally had abandoned the British wounded to the French and was thoroughly uncooperative, promising and then refusing to supply the British forces, aggravating Wellesley and causing considerable friction between the British and their Spanish allies. The lack of supplies, coupled with the threat of French reinforcement (including the possible inclusion of Napoleon himself) in the spring, led to the British deciding to retreat into Portugal.[94] Following his victory at Talavera, Wellesley was elevated to the Peerage of the United Kingdom on 26 August as Viscount Wellington of Talavera and of Wellington, with the subsidiary title of Baron Douro of Wellesley.[95][96] 1810[edit] In 1810, a newly enlarged French army under Marshal André Masséna invaded Portugal. British opinion both at home and in the army was negative and there were suggestions that they must evacuate Portugal. Instead, Lord Wellington first slowed the French down at Buçaco;[97] he then prevented them from taking the Lisbon Peninsula by the construction of his massive earthworks, the Lines of Torres Vedras, which had been assembled in complete secrecy and had flanks guarded by the Royal Navy.[98] The baffled and starving French invasion forces retreated after six months. Wellington's pursuit was frustrated by a series of reverses inflicted by Marshal Ney in a much-lauded rear guard campaign.[99] 1811[edit] In 1811, Masséna returned toward Portugal to relieve Almeida; Wellington narrowly checked the French at the Battle of Fuentes de Onoro.[100] Simultaneously, his subordinate, Viscount Beresford, fought Soult's 'Army of the South' to a mutual bloody standstill at the Battle of Albuera in May.[101] Wellington was promoted to full General on 31 July for his services. The French abandoned Almeida, slipping away from British pursuit,[102] but retained the twin Spanish fortresses of Ciudad Rodrigo and Badajoz, the 'Keys' guarding the roads through the mountain passes into Portugal.[103] 1812[edit] Wellington at the Battle of Salamanca Portrait of the Duke of Wellington by Francisco Goya, 1812–14. In 1812, Wellesley finally captured Ciudad Rodrigo by a rapid movement as the French went into winter quarters, storming it before they could react. He then moved south quickly, besieged the fortress of Badajoz for a month and captured it during one bloody night. On viewing the aftermath of the Storming of Badajoz, Wellington lost his composure and cried at the sight of the bloody carnage in the breaches.[104] His army now was a veteran British force reinforced by units of the retrained Portuguese army. Campaigning in Spain, he routed the French at the Battle of Salamanca, taking advantage of a minor French mispositioning.[105] The victory liberated the Spanish capital of Madrid. As reward, he was created "Earl" and then "Marquess of Wellington" and given command of all Allied armies in Spain.[106] Wellesley attempted to take the vital fortress of Burgos, which linked Madrid to France. But failure, due in part to a lack of siege guns, forced him into a headlong retreat with the loss of over 2,000 casualties.[107] The French abandoned Andalusia, and combined the troops of Soult and Marmont. Thus combined, the French outnumbered the British, putting the British forces in a precarious position. Wellesley withdrew his army and, joined with the smaller corps commanded by Rowland Hill, began to retreat to Portugal. Marshal Soult declined to attack.[108] 1813[edit] In 1813, Wellesley led a new offensive, this time against the French line of communications. He struck through the hills north of Burgos, the Tras os Montes, and switched his supply line from Portugal to Santander on Spain's north coast; this led to the French abandoning Madrid and Burgos. Continuing to outflank the French lines, Wellesley caught up with and smashed the army of King Joseph Bonaparte in the Battle of Vitoria, for which he was promoted to field marshal on 21 June.[109] He personally led a column against the French centre, while other columns commanded by Sir Thomas Graham, Rowland Hill and the Earl of Dalhousie looped around the French right and left (this battle became the subject of Beethoven's opus 91, Wellington's Victory). The British troops broke ranks to loot the abandoned French wagons instead of pursuing the beaten foe. This gross abandonment of discipline caused an enraged Wellesley to write in a famous dispatch to Earl Bathurst, "We have in the service the scum of the earth as common soldiers".[110] Although later, when his temper had cooled, he extended his comment to praise the men under his command saying that though many of the men were, "the scum of the earth; it is really wonderful that we should have made them to the fine fellows they are".[111] After taking the small fortresses of Pamplona, Wellesley invested San Sebastián but was frustrated by the obstinate French garrison, losing 693 dead and 316 captured in a failed assault and suspending the siege at the end of July. Soult's relief attempt was blocked by the Spanish Army of Galicia at San Marcial, allowing the Allies to consolidate their position and tighten the ring around the city, which fell in September after a second spirited defence.[112] Wellesley then forced Soult's demoralised and battered army into a fighting retreat into France, punctuated by battles at the Pyrenees,[113] Bidassoa and Nivelle.[114][115] Wellesley invaded southern France, winning at the Nive and Orthez.[116] Wellesley's final battle against his rival Soult occurred at Toulouse, where the Allied divisions were badly mauled storming the French redoubts, losing some 4,600 men. Despite this momentary victory, news arrived of Napoleon's defeat and abdication[117] and Soult, seeing no reason to continue the fighting, agreed on a ceasefire with Wellesley, allowing Soult to evacuate the city.[118] Aftermath[edit] Hailed as the conquering hero by the British, Wellesley was named "Duke of Wellington", a title still held by his descendants (as he did not return to England until the Peninsular War was over, he was awarded all his patents of nobility in a unique ceremony lasting a full day).[119] He received some recognition during his lifetime (the title of "Duque de Ciudad Rodrigo") and the Spanish King Ferdinand VII allowed him to keep part of the works of art from the Royal Collection which he had recovered from the French. His equestrian portrait features prominently in the Monument to the Battle of Vitoria, in present-day Vitoria-Gasteiz.[120] His popularity in Britain was due to his image and his appearance as well as to his military triumphs. His victory fitted well with the passion and intensity of the Romantic movement, with its emphasis on individuality. His personal style had an impact on the fashions on Britain at the time: his tall, lean figure and his plumed black hat and grand yet classic uniform and white trousers became very popular.[121] In late 1814, the Prime Minister wanted him to take command in Canada and with the assignment of winning the War of 1812 against the United States. Wellesley replied that he would go to America, but he believed that he was needed more in Europe. He stated: I think you have no right, from the state of war, to demand any concession of territory from America... You have not been able to carry it into the enemy's territory, notwithstanding your military success, and now undoubted military superiority, and have not even cleared your own territory on the point of attack. You cannot on any principle of equality in negotiation claim a cession of territory except in exchange for other advantages which you have in your power... Then if this reasoning be true, why stipulate for the uti possidetis? You can get no territory: indeed, the state of your military operations, however creditable, does not entitle you to demand any.[122] He was appointed ambassador to France,[123] then took Lord Castlereagh's place as first plenipotentiary to the Congress of Vienna, where he strongly advocated allowing France to keep its place in the European balance of power. On 2 January 1815 the title of his Knighthood of the Bath was converted to Knight Grand Cross upon the expansion of that order.[124] Waterloo campaign[edit] Main article: Hundred Days Wellesley. Engraving by William Say after British painter Thomas Phillips. On 26 February 1815, Napoleon escaped from Elba and returned to France. He regained control of the country by May and faced a renewed alliance against him.[125] Wellesley left Vienna for what became known as the Waterloo Campaign. He arrived in Belgium to take command of the British-German army and their allied Dutch-Belgians, all stationed alongside the Prussian forces of Gebhard Leberecht von Blücher.[126] Napoleon's strategy was to isolate the Allied and Prussian armies, and annihilate each one separately before the Austrians and Russians arrived. In doing so the vast superiority in numbers of the Coalition would be greatly diminished. He would then seek the possibility of a peace with Austria and Russia.[127] The French invaded Belgium, with Napoleon defeating the Prussians at Ligny, and Marshal Ney engaging indecisively with Wellesley, at the Battle of Quatre Bras.[128] The Prussians retreated 18 miles north to Wavre whilst Wellesley’s Anglo-Allied army withdrew 15 miles north to a site he had noted the previous year as favourable for a battle: the north ridge of a shallow valley on the Brussels road, just south of the small town of Waterloo. On 17 June there was torrential rain, which severely hampered movement [129] and had a considerable effect the next day, 18 June, when the Battle of Waterloo was fought. This was the first time Wellesley had encountered Napoleon, and he commanded an Anglo-Dutch-German army that consisted of approximately 73,000 troops, 26,000 (36 percent) of whom were British.[130] Battle[edit] Main article: Battle of Waterloo Wellington at Waterloo, by Robert Alexander Hillingford. The Battle of Waterloo commenced with a diversionary attack on Hougoumont by a division of French soldiers. After a barrage of 80 cannons the first French infantry attack was launched by Comte D'Erlon's I Corps. D'Erlon's troops advanced through the Allied centre, resulting in Allied troops in front of the ridge retreating in disorder through the main position. D'Erlon's corps stormed the most fortified Allied position, La Haye Sainte, but failed to take it. An Allied division under Thomas Picton met the remainder of D'Erlon's corps head to head, engaging them in an infantry duel in which Picton fell. During this struggle Lord Uxbridge launched two of his cavalry brigades at the enemy, catching the French infantry off guard, driving them to the bottom of the slope, and capturing two French Imperial Eagles. The charge, however, over-reached itself, and the British cavalry, crushed by fresh French horsemen hurled at them by Napoleon, were driven back, suffering tremendous losses.[131] A little before 16:00, Marshal Ney noted an apparent exodus from Wellesley's centre. He mistook the movement of casualties to the rear for the beginnings of a retreat, and sought to exploit it. Ney at this time had few infantry reserves left, as most of the infantry had been committed either to the futile Hougoumont attack or to the defence of the French right. Ney therefore tried to break Wellesley's centre with a cavalry charge alone.[132] The Grenadiers à Cheval. Napoleon can be seen in the background on a grey horse.[133] At about 16:30, the first Prussian corps arrived. Commanded by Freiherr von Bülow, IV Corps arrived as the French cavalry attack was in full spate. Bülow sent the 15th Brigade to link up with Wellesley's left flank in the Frichermont–La Haie area while the brigade's horse artillery battery and additional brigade artillery deployed to its left in support.[134] Napoleon sent Lobau's corps to intercept the rest of Bülow's IV Corps proceeding to Plancenoit. The 15th Brigade sent Lobau's corps into retreat to the Plancenoit area. Von Hiller's 16th Brigade also pushed forward with six battalions against Plancenoit. Napoleon had dispatched all eight battalions of the Young Guard to reinforce Lobau, who was now seriously pressed by the enemy. Napoleon's Young Guard counter-attacked and, after very hard fighting, secured Plancenoit, but were themselves counter-attacked and driven out.[135] Napoleon then resorted to sending two battalions of the Middle/Old Guard into Plancenoit and after ferocious fighting they recaptured the village.[135] The French cavalry attacked the British infantry squares many times, each at heavy cost to the French but with few British casualties. Ney himself was displaced from his horse four times.[136] Eventually it became obvious, even to Ney, that cavalry alone were achieving little. Belatedly, he organised a combined-arms attack, using Bachelu's division and Tissot's regiment of Foy's division from Reille's II Corps plus those French cavalry that remained in a fit state to fight. This assault was directed along much the same route as the previous heavy cavalry attacks.[137] The storming of La Haye Sainte, by Knötel. Meanwhile, at approximately the same time as Ney's combined-arms assault on the centre-right of Wellesley's line, Napoleon ordered Ney to capture La Haye Sainte at whatever the cost. Ney accomplished this with what was left of D'Erlon's corps soon after 18:00. Ney then moved horse artillery up towards Wellesley's centre and began to destroy the infantry squares at short-range with canister.[132] This all but destroyed the 27th (Inniskilling) Regiment, and the 30th and 73rd Regiments suffered such heavy losses that they had to combine to form a viable square. Wellesley's centre was now on the verge of collapse and wide open to an attack from the French. Luckily for Wellesley, Pirch I's and Zieten's corps of the Prussian Army were now at hand. Zieten's corps permitted the two fresh cavalry brigades of Vivian and Vandeleur on Wellesley's extreme left to be moved and posted behind the depleted centre. Pirch I Corps then proceeded to support Bülow and together they regained possession of Plancenoit, and once more the Charleroi road was swept by Prussian round shot. The value of this reinforcement at this particular moment can hardly be overestimated.[131] The French army now fiercely attacked the Coalition all along the line with the culminating point being reached when Napoleon sent forward the Imperial Guard at 19:30. The attack of the Imperial Guards was mounted by five battalions of the Middle Guard, and not by the Grenadiers or Chasseurs of the Old Guard. Marching through a hail of canister and skirmisher fire and severely outnumbered, the 3,000 or so Middle Guardsmen advanced to the west of La Haye Sainte and proceeded to separate into three distinct attack forces. One, consisting of two battalions of Grenadiers, defeated the Coalition's first line and marched on. Chassé's relatively fresh Dutch division was sent against them and Allied artillery fired into the victorious Grenadiers' flank. This still could not stop the Guard's advance, so Chassé ordered his first brigade to charge the outnumbered French, who faltered and broke.[138] British 10th Hussars of Vivian's Brigade (red shakos – blue uniforms) attacking mixed French troops, including a square of Guard grenadiers (left, middle distance) in the final stages of the battle. Further to the west, 1,500 British Foot Guards under Maitland were lying down to protect themselves from the French artillery. As two battalions of Chasseurs approached, the second prong of the Imperial Guard's attack, Maitland's guardsmen rose and devastated them with point-blank volleys. The Chasseurs deployed to counter-attack, but began to waver. A bayonet charge by the Foot Guards then broke them. The third prong, a fresh Chasseur battalion, now came up in support. The British guardsmen retreated with these Chasseurs in pursuit, but the latter were halted as the 52nd Light Infantry wheeled in line onto their flank and poured a devastating fire into them and then charged.[138][139] Under this onslaught they too broke.[139] The last of the Guard retreated headlong. A ripple of panic passed through the French lines as the astounding news spread: "La Garde recule. Sauve qui peut!" ("The Guard retreats. Save yourself if you can!"). Wellesley then stood up in Copenhagen's stirrups, and waved his hat in the air to signal an advance of the Allied line just as the Prussians were overrunning the French positions to the east. What remained of the French army then abandoned the field in disorder. Wellesley and Blücher met at the inn of La Belle Alliance, on the north-south road which bisected the battlefield, and it was agreed that the Prussians should pursue the retreating French army back to France.[138] The Treaty of Paris was signed on 20 November 1815.[140] Controversy[edit] Much historical discussion has been made about Napoleon's decision to send 33,000 troops under Marshal Grouchy to intercept the Prussians, but—having defeated Blücher at Ligny on 16 June and forced the Allies to retreat in divergent directions—Napoleon may have been strategically astute in a judgement that he would have been unable to beat the combined Allied forces on one battlefield. Wellesley's comparable strategic gamble was to leave 17,000 troops and artillery, mostly Dutch and Belgian, 8.1 mi (13.0 km) away at Halle, north-west of Mont-Saint-Jean, in case of a French advance up the Mons-Hal-Brussels road.[141] The campaign led to numerous other controversies, especially concerning the Prussians. For example: Were Wellesley's troop dispositions prior to Napoleon's invasion of Belgium sound? Did Wellesley somehow mislead or betray Blücher by promising, then failing, to come directly to Blücher's aid at Ligny? Who deserved the lion's share of credit for the victory—Wellesley or the Prussians? These and other such issues concerning Blücher's, Wellesley's, and Napoleon's decisions during the campaign were the subject of a major strategic-level study by the famous Prussian political-military theorist Carl von Clausewitz, Feldzug von 1815: Strategische Uebersicht des Feldzugs von 1815,[142] English title: The Campaign of 1815: Strategic Overview of the Campaign. Written c.1827, this study was Clausewitz's last such work and is widely considered to be the best example of Clausewitz's mature theories concerning such analyses.[143] It attracted the attention of Wellesley's staff, who prompted the Duke to write his only published essay on the campaign (other than his immediate, official after-action report, "The Waterloo Dispatch"), his 1842 "Memorandum on the Battle of Waterloo". While Wellesley disputed Clausewitz on several points, the Prussian writer largely absolved Wellesley of accusations levelled against him by nationalistic German axe-grinders. This exchange with Clausewitz was quite famous in Britain in the 19th century (it was heavily discussed in, for example, Chesney's Waterloo Lectures (1868).) It seems, however, to have been systematically ignored by British historians writing since 1914, which is odd considering that it was one of only two discussions of the battle that Wellesley wrote. The explanation, unfortunately, is probably that it drew too much attention to the decisive German role in Wellesley's victory—which Wellesley himself was perfectly happy to acknowledge, but which became an awkward subject given Anglo-German hostilities in the 20th century.[144] Political career[edit] Part of the Politics series on Toryism Characteristics Monarchism Traditionalism High Church Anglicanism Traditional Catholicism Loyalism Royalism Interventionism Agrarianism/Self-sufficiency Counterrevolution Classicism High culture Noblesse oblige Organic unity Unionism General topics Cavaliers Cavalier Parliament Château Clique Jacobitism Divine right of kings Corporatism Family Compact (Canada) Oxford Movement Powellism People Robert Filmer 1st Earl of Clarendon Roger L'Estrange 1st Earl of Rochester 1st Viscount Bolingbroke 3rd Earl of Bute 1st Duke of Wellington Walter Scott Stanley Baldwin G. K. Chesterton Winston Churchill Enoch Powell George Grant Roger Scruton Peter Hitchens Michael Gove Related topics Conservatism Distributists Miguelism Vendéens Chouans Legitimism Carlism Sanfedismo Viva Maria Cristeros Reactionary High Tory Red Tory Loyalist Royalist Veronese Easter British portal Canadian portal Politics portal v t e Wellington entered politics again, when he was appointed Master-General of the Ordnance in the Tory government of Lord Liverpool on 26 December 1818.[145] He also became Governor of Plymouth on 9 October 1819.[146] He was appointed Commander-in-Chief of the British Army on 22 January 1827[147][148] and Constable of the Tower of London on 5 February 1827.[149] Prime Minister[edit] Main article: Tory Government 1828–1830 Along with Robert Peel, Wellesley became an increasingly influential member of the Tory party, and in 1828 he resigned as Commander-in-Chief and became Prime Minister.[150] Portrait of the Duke of Wellington by John Jackson, 1830–31 During his first seven months as prime minister he chose not to live in the official residence at 10 Downing Street, finding it too small. He moved in only because his own home, Apsley House, required extensive renovations. During this time he was largely instrumental in the foundation of King's College London. On 20 January 1829 Wellington was appointed Lord Warden of the Cinque Ports.[151] Catholic Emancipation[edit] His term was marked by Catholic emancipation; the granting of almost full civil rights to Catholics in Great Britain and Ireland. The change was prompted by the landslide by-election win of Daniel O'Connell, an Irish Catholic proponent of emancipation, who was elected despite not being legally allowed to sit in Parliament. In the House of Lords, facing stiff opposition, Wellesley spoke for Catholic Emancipation, and according to some sources, gave one of the best speeches of his career.[152] He was born in Ireland and so had some understanding of the grievances of the Catholic communities there; as Chief Secretary, he had given an undertaking that the remaining Penal Laws would only be enforced as "mildly" as possible.[80] In 1811 Catholic soldiers were given freedom of worship[153] and 18 years later the Catholic Relief Act 1829 was passed with a majority of 105. Many Tories voted against the Act, and it passed only with the help of the Whigs.[154] Wellington had threatened to resign as Prime Minister if the King (George IV) did not give his Royal Assent.[155] The Earl of Winchilsea accused the Duke of, "an insidious design for the infringement of our liberties and the introduction of Popery into every department of the State".[156] Wellington responded by immediately challenging Winchilsea to a duel. On 21 March 1829, Wellington and Winchilsea met on Battersea fields. When it came time to fire, the Duke took aim and Winchilsea kept his arm down. The Duke fired wide to the right. Accounts differ as to whether he missed on purpose, an act known in dueling as a delope. Wellington claimed he did. However, he was noted for his poor aim and reports more sympathetic to Winchilsea claimed he had aimed to kill. Winchilsea did not fire, a plan he and his second almost certainly decided upon before the duel.[157] Honour was saved and Winchilsea wrote Wellington an apology.[156] The nickname "Iron Duke" originates from this period, when he experienced a high degree of personal and political unpopularity. Its repeated use in Freeman's Journal throughout June 1830 appears to bear reference to his resolute political will, with taints of disapproval from its Irish editors.[158][159][160] His residence at Apsley House was targeted by a mob of demonstrators on 27 April 1831 and again on 12 October, leaving his windows smashed.[161] Iron shutters were installed in June 1832 to prevent further damage by crowds angry over rejection of the Reform Bill, which he strongly opposed.[162] Wellesley's government fell in 1830. In the summer and autumn of that year, a wave of riots swept the country.[163] The Whigs had been out of power for most years since the 1770s, and saw political reform in response to the unrest as the key to their return. Wellesley stuck to the Tory policy of no reform and no expansion of suffrage, and as a result lost a vote of no confidence on 15 November 1830.[164] The Reform Act[edit] Main article: Reform Act 1832 The Whigs introduced the first Reform Bill while Wellesley and the Tories worked to prevent its passage. The Whigs could not get the bill past second reading in the British House of Commons, and the bill failed. An election followed in direct response, and the Whigs were returned with a landslide majority. A second Reform Act was introduced and passed in the House of Commons, but was defeated in the Tory-controlled House of Lords. Another wave of near insurrection swept the country. During this time, Wellesley was greeted by a hostile reaction from the crowds at the opening of the Liverpool and Manchester Railway. The Whig Government fell in 1832 and Wellesley was unable to form a Tory Government partly because of a run on the Bank of England. This left King William IV no choice but to restore Earl Grey to the premiership. Eventually the bill passed the House of Lords after the King threatened to fill that House with newly created Whig peers if it were not. Wellesley was never reconciled to the change; when Parliament first met after the first election under the widened franchise, Wellesley is reported to have said "I never saw so many shocking bad hats in my life".[165] Jewish emancipation[edit] Main article: Emancipation of the Jews in England During debate on the Jewish Civil Disabilities Repeal Bill, Wellington, who opposed the Bill, stated in Parliament on 1 August 1833: "... this is a Christian country and a Christian legislature, and that the effect of this measure would be to remove that peculiar character." And "I see no ground whatever for passing the Bill; and shall, therefore, vote against it." The Bill was defeated, 104 votes against, and 54 for.[166] Conservative government[edit] Main articles: Conservative Provisional Government 1834 and Conservative Government 1834–1835 Daguerreotype of the Duke of Wellington, then aged 74 or 75, by Antoine Claudet, 1844 Wellington was gradually superseded as leader of the Tories by Robert Peel, while the party evolved into the Conservatives. When the Tories were returned to power in 1834, Wellington declined to become Prime Minister and Peel was selected instead.[167] However, Peel was in Italy at that time and for three weeks in November and December 1834, Wellington acted as interim leader, taking the responsibilities of Prime Minister and most of the other ministries.[167] In Peel's first cabinet (1834–1835), Wellington became Foreign Secretary, while in the second (1841–1846) he was a Minister without Portfolio and Leader of the House of Lords.[168] Wellington was also re-appointed Commander-in-Chief of the British Army on 15 August 1842 following the resignation of Lord Hill.[169] Family[edit] Upon this return from the Hanover Expedition in 1805, Wellesley received good news; owing to his new title and status, Kitty Pakenham's family had consented to his marrying her. Wellesley and Kitty were married in Dublin on 10 April 1806.[170] The marriage would later prove to be unsatisfactory and the two would spend years apart while Wellesley was campaigning. Kitty grew depressed, while Wellesley found solace elsewhere.[171][78] However the marriage produced two sons, Arthur, in 1807, and Charles, in 1808. They lived apart for most of the time and occupied separate rooms in the house when they were together. Her brother, Edward "Ned" Pakenham, served under Wellesley throughout the Peninsular War and Wellesley's regard for him helped to smooth his relations with Kitty, until Ned Pakenham's death at the Battle of New Orleans in 1815.[172] Retirement[edit] Wellesley retired from political life in 1846, although he remained Commander-in-Chief, and returned briefly to the spotlight in 1848 when he helped organise a military force to protect London during that year of European revolution.[173] The Conservative Party had split over the Repeal of the Corn Laws in 1846, with Wellesley and most of the former Cabinet still supporting Peel, but most of the MPs led by Lord Derby supporting a protectionist stance. Early in 1852 Wellesley, by then very deaf, gave Derby's first government its nickname by shouting "Who? Who?" as the list of inexperienced Cabinet Ministers was read out in the House of Lords.[174] He became Chief Ranger and Keeper of Hyde Park and St. James's Park on 31 August 1850.[175] He was also colonel of the 33rd Regiment of Foot from 1 February 1806[176] and colonel of the Grenadier Guards from 22 January 1827.[177] Kitty died of cancer in 1831; despite their generally unhappy relations, which had led to an effective separation, Wellesley was said to have been greatly saddened by her death, his one comfort being that after "half a lifetime together, they had come to understand each other at the end".[178] He had found consolation for his unhappy marriage in his warm friendship with the diarist Harriet Arbuthnot, wife of his colleague Charles Arbuthnot.[179] Harriet's death in the cholera epidemic of 1834 was almost as great a blow to Wellesley as it was to her husband.[180] The two widowers spent their last years together at Apsley House.[181] Death and funeral[edit] The Duke's funeral procession passing through Trafalgar Square Wellington's tomb, in St. Paul's Cathedral, London Wellesley died at Walmer Castle in Deal on 14 September 1852. This was his residence as Lord Warden of the Cinque Ports. Walmer Castle was said to have been his favourite residence. He was found to be unwell on that morning and was aided from his military campaign bed (the same one he used throughout his historic military career) and seated in his chair where he died. His death was recorded as being due to the aftereffects of a stroke culminating in a series of seizures. He was aged 83.[182][183] Although in life he hated travelling by rail (after witnessing the death of William Huskisson, one of the first railway accident casualties), his body was then taken by train to London, where he was given a state funeral—one of only a handful of British subjects to be honoured in that way (other examples are Lord Nelson and Winston Churchill)—and the last heraldic state funeral to be held in Britain. The funeral took place on 18 November 1852.[184][185] At his funeral there was hardly any space to stand because of the number of people attending, and the effusive praise given him in Tennyson's "Ode on the Death of the Duke of Wellington" attests to his stature at the time of his death. He was buried in a sarcophagus of luxulyanite in St Paul's Cathedral next to Lord Nelson.[186] A bronze memorial was sculpted by Alfred Stevens, and features two intricate supports: "Truth tearing the tongue out of the mouth of False-hood", and "Valour trampling Cowardice underfoot". Stevens did not live to see it placed in its home under one of the great arches of the Cathedral.[187] A bronze statue of Wellington by Carlo Marochetti in Woodhouse Moor, Leeds Wellesley's casket was decorated with banners which were made for his funeral procession. Originally, there was one from Prussia, which was removed during World War I and never reinstated.[188] In the procession, the "Great Banner" was carried by General Sir James Charles Chatterton of the 4th Dragoon Guards on the orders of Queen Victoria.[189] Most of the book A Biographical Sketch of the Military and Political Career of the Late Duke of Wellington by Weymouth newspaper proprietor Joseph Drew is a detailed contemporary account of his death, lying in state and funeral.[190] After his death Irish and English newspapers disputed whether Wellington had been born an Irishman or Englishman.[191] In 2002 he was number 15 in the BBC's poll of the 100 Greatest Britons.[192] Owing to its links with Wellington, as the former commanding officer and colonel of the regiment, the title "33rd (The Duke of Wellington's) Regiment" was granted to the 33rd Regiment of Foot, on 18 June 1853 (the 38th anniversary of the Battle of Waterloo) by Queen Victoria.[193] Wellesley's battle record is exemplary; he ultimately participated in some 60 battles during the course of his military career.[194] Personality[edit] Wellington always rose early; he "couldn't bear to lie awake in bed", even if the army was not on the march.[195] Even when he returned to civilian life after 1815, he slept in a camp bed, reflecting his lack of regard for creature comforts; it remains on display in Walmer Castle.[196] General Miguel de Álava complained that Wellington said so often that the army would march "at daybreak" and dine on "cold meat", that he began to dread those two phrases.[197] While on campaign, he seldom ate anything between breakfast and dinner. During the retreat to Portugal in 1811, he subsisted on "cold meat and bread", to the despair of his staff who dined with him.[198] He was, however, renowned for the quality of the wine which he drank and served, often drinking a bottle with his dinner (not a great quantity by the standards of his day).[199] He rarely showed emotion in public, and often appeared condescending to those less competent or less well-born than himself (which was nearly everyone). However, Álava was a witness to an incident just before the Battle of Salamanca. Wellington was eating a chicken leg while observing the manoeuvres of the French army through a spyglass. He spotted an overextension in the French left flank, and realised that he could launch a successful attack there. He threw the drumstick in the air and shouted "Les français sont perdus!" ("The French are lost!").[200] After the Battle of Toulouse, an aide brought him the news of Napoleon's abdication, and Wellington broke into an impromptu flamenco dance, spinning around on his heels and clicking his fingers.[201] Plaster model, located at the Victoria and Albert Museum, of the 'Valour and Cowardice' motif used in the memorial to Wellington at St. Paul's Cathedral Military historian Charles Dalton recorded that, after a hard-fought battle in Spain, a young officer made the comment, "I am going to dine with Wellington tonight", which was overheard by the Duke as he rode by. "Give me at least the prefix of Mr. before my name," Wellington said. "My Lord," replied the officer, "we do not speak of Mr. Caesar or Mr. Alexander, so why should I speak of Mr. Wellington?"[202] His stern countenance and iron-handed discipline were renowned; he was said to disapprove of soldiers cheering as "too nearly an expression of opinion."[203] Nevertheless, Wellesley cared for his men; he refused to pursue the French after the battles of Porto and Salamanca, foreseeing an inevitable cost to his army in chasing a diminished enemy through rough terrain. The only time that he ever showed grief in public was after the storming of Badajoz; he cried at the sight of the British dead in the breaches.[104] In this context, his famous dispatch after the Battle of Vitoria, calling them the "scum of the earth," can be seen to be fuelled as much by disappointment at their breaking ranks as by anger. He expressed his grief openly the night after Waterloo before his personal physician, and later with his family; unwilling to be congratulated for his victory, he broke down in tears, his fighting spirit diminished by the high cost of the battle and great personal loss.[204] Viva Montgomerie, niece to the third Duke of Wellington, relates an anecdote that Holman, valet to the duke, often recalled how his master never spoke to servants unless he was obliged to, preferring instead to write his orders on a note pad on his dressing-table. (Holman, incidentally, was said to greatly resemble Napoleon.)[205] In 1822, he had an operation to improve the hearing of the left ear. The result, however, was that he became permanently deaf on that side. It is claimed that he was "never quite well afterwards".[183] Wellington had a "vigorous sexual appetite" and many amorous liaisons during his marriage to Kitty. He enjoyed the company of intellectual and attractive women for many decades, particularly after the Battle of Waterloo and his subsequent Ambassadorial position in Paris. The British press lampooned this side of the national hero.[171] In 1824, one liaison came back to haunt him, when Wellington received a letter from a publisher offering to refrain from issuing an edition of the rather racy memoirs of one of his mistresses Harriette Wilson, in exchange for financial consideration. It is said that the Duke promptly returned the letter, after scrawling across it, "Publish and be damned".[206] However, Hibbert notes in his biography that the letter can be found among the Duke's papers, with nothing written on it.[207] It is certain that Wellington did reply, and the tone of a further letter from the publisher, quoted by Longford, suggests that he had refused in the strongest language to submit to blackmail.[208] He was also a remarkably practical man who spoke concisely. In 1851, it was discovered that there were a great many sparrows flying about in the Crystal Palace just before the Great Exhibition was to open. His advice to Queen Victoria was "Sparrowhawks, ma'am".[209] Wellington has often been portrayed as a defensive general, even though many, perhaps most, of his battles were offensive (Argaum, Assaye, Oporto, Salamanca, Vitoria, Toulouse). But for most of the Peninsular War, where he earned his fame, his troops lacked the numbers for an attack.[210] Meeting Lord Nelson[edit] In September 1805, Major-General Wellesley was newly returned from his campaigns in India and was not yet particularly well-known to the public. He reported to the office of the Secretary for War to request a new assignment. In the waiting room he met Vice-Admiral Horatio Nelson, already a legendary figure after his victories at the Nile and Copenhagen, who was briefly in England after months chasing the French Toulon fleet to the West Indies and back. Some 30 years later, Wellington recalled a conversation that Nelson began with him which Wellesley found "almost all on his side in a style so vain and silly as to surprise and almost disgust me".[211] Nelson left the room to inquire who the young general was and, on his return, switched to a very different tone, discussing the war, the state of the colonies, and the geopolitical situation as between equals.[212] On this second discussion, Wellington recalled, "I don't know that I ever had a conversation that interested me more".[213] This was the only time that the two men met; Nelson was killed at his great victory at Trafalgar just seven weeks later.[211] Wellesley/Wesley and Colley/Cowley heritage[edit] The earliest mention of the "Welles-lieghs" dates from 1180, around a settlement still known as Wellesley Farm. The family had been granted lands to the south of Wells, Somerset for their passive acceptance of the Norman conquest of England of 1066.[214] An early member of the family, Stephen de Wellesley, who married Alice (de Caille) from Yorkshire, England, relocated to Ireland during 1172, in the role of a Standard Bearer to Henry II.[215] The surname "Wesley" was adopted from a childless wealthy cousin, Garret Wesley. In 1728, Wellington's paternal grandfather Richard Colley, a landlord who lived at Rahin near Carbury, County Kildare, changed his surname to Wesley.[216] Wellington's coat of arms The Colley or Cowley family had lived in that part of Kildare since the time of Wellington's ancestor, Sir Henry Colley or Cowley, who died before 2 October 1584.[217] Sir Henry in his lifetime possessed Carbury Castle, in north-west Kildare, starting with a 21-year lease in 1554.[218][219] Colley is a surname of English origin.[220] However, Colley or Cowley is also an Anglicised form of Mac Amhalghaidh, a family who were lords of Cálraighe in Chalaid in what is now County Westmeath.[221] This family claimed descent from the 5th-century Irish king, Niall of the Nine Hostages, and had the following genealogy ("m" indicates "son of"): Amlaibh m Amlaibh m Muircertaigh m Aedha Finn m Maghnusa m Muircertaigh m Domnaill m Floinn m Aedha m Amhlaibh m Fergail m Con Coiccriche m Forannain m Suibhne m Domnaill m Ruairc m Cathusaigh m Aedha m Cuinn m Maoil Fhothaid m Criomthainn m Brenainn m Briain m Maine m Nell Noigiallaigh.[222] The preponderance of the evidence is that Wellington's family originated with John Cooley, lord of the manor of Glaston, Rutland, England, who was born around 1400. His son, Walter, born circa 1440, arrived in Drogheda, Ireland, about 1500.[223] Walter's son Robert Cowley who became Master of the Rolls in Ireland[224] died in 1546 leaving a son, Walter Cowley, Principal Solicitor for Ireland, who appears to have been father to Sir Henry.[224] Henry Colley married Katherine Cusack, daughter of Sir Thomas Cusack, Lord Chancellor of Ireland. With this marriage began the Colley-Wellesley connection, since Sir Thomas was the son of John Cusack and his wife, Alison de Wellesley.[225] Titles and tributes[edit] Main article: Arms, titles, honours and styles of Arthur Wellesley, 1st Duke of Wellington See also: Batons of Arthur Wellesley, 1st Duke of Wellington See also: List of monuments to Arthur Wellesley, 1st Duke of Wellington Nicknames[edit] Apsley House in 1829, by Thomas H. Shepherd Sir John Steell's equestrian statue of the Duke of Wellington – 'the Iron Duke in bronze by Steell' Edinburgh 1852 The Iron Duke[edit] This commonly used nickname originally related to his consistent political resolve rather than to any particular incident. In various cases its editorial use appears to be disparaging.[158][159][160][226] It is likely that its use became more widespread after an incident in 1832 in which he installed metal shutters to prevent rioters breaking windows at Apsley House.[162][227] The term may have been made increasingly popular by Punch cartoons published in 1844–45.[228][229] Wellesley had various other nicknames: In the popular ballads of the day Wellington was called "Nosey" or "Old Nosey".[230] Tsar Alexander I of Russia called Wellington "Le vainqueur du vainqueur du monde", the conqueror of the world’s conqueror, the phrase "the world's conqueror" obviously referring to Napoleon.[231] Officers under his command called him "The Beau", as he was a fine dresser.[232] Spanish troops called him "The Eagle", while Portuguese troops called him "Douro Douro" after his river crossing at Oporto in 1809.[233] "Beau Douro"; Wellington found this amusing when hearing it used by a Colonel of the Coldstream Guards.[232] "Sepoy General"; Napoleon used this term as an insult to Wellington's military service in India, publicly considering him an unworthy opponent.[234] The name was used in the French newspaper Le Moniteur Universel, as a means of propaganda.[235] "The Beef"; It is a theory that the Beef Wellington dish is a reference to Wellington, although some chefs dispute this.[236] In addition: His name was given to Wellington boots, after the custom-made boots he wore instead of traditional Hessian boots.[237] See also[edit] Napoleonic Wars portal Biography portal Battle record of Arthur Wellesley, 1st Duke of Wellington Army Gold Medal Military General Service Medal Seringapatam medal Hippodrome Wellington Equestrian statue of the Duke of Wellington, Glasgow Wellington Statue, Aldershot Vickers Wellesley Vickers Wellington Notes[edit] ^ Kauffmann, C.M.; Jenkins, Susan; Wieseman, Marjorie E. (2009) [1982]. Catalogue of Paintings in the Wellington Museum, Apsley House (PDF) (Revised ed.). English Heritage in association with Paul Holberton Publishing. p. 166. ISBN 978 1 903470 78 7.  ^ a b Wellesley (2008). p. 16. ^ Gifford (1817). p. 375. ^ Severn (2007). p. 13. ^ Though 29 April is quoted as most likely by Ernest Marsh Lloyd, writing in the Dictionary of National Biography. London: Smith, Elder & Co. 1885–1900.  ^ Guedalla (1997). p. 480. His baptismal font was donated to St. Nahi's Church in Dundrum, Dublin, in 1914. ^  "Wellesley, Arthur". Dictionary of National Biography. London: Smith, Elder & Co. 1885–1900.  p. 170. Retrieved 17 March 2012 ^ Wellesley (2008). p. 16. "Anne Mornington insisted that she remembered the details: 1 May 1769, at 6 Merrion Street, Dublin – an elegant new townhouse round the corner from St Stephen's Green, the largest public square in Europe." ^ Wellesley (2008). p. 14. Longford says, "there is no valid argument" for this choice ^ Holmes (2002). p. 7. ^ Holmes (2002). pp. 6–7. ^ a b Holmes (2002). p. 8. ^ a b Holmes (2002). p. 9. ^ Holmes (2002). pp. 19–20. ^ a b Holmes (2002). p. 20. ^ a b c Holmes (2002). p. 21. ^ The London Gazette: no. 12836. p. 118. 6 March 1787. Retrieved 10 March 2012. ^ The London Gazette: no. 12959. p. 47. 26 January 1788. Retrieved 10 March 2012. ^ a b Holmes (2002). p. 22. ^ The London Gazette: no. 13121. p. 539. 8 August 1789. Retrieved 10 March 2012. ^ Holmes (2002). p. 23. ^ a b c Holmes (2002). p. 24. ^ "Regimental Archives". Duke of Wellington's Regiment (West Riding). Retrieved 10 March 2012.  ^ The London Gazette: no. 13347. p. 542. 27 September 1791. Retrieved 10 March 2012. ^ The London Gazette: no. 13488. p. 976. 25 December 1792. Retrieved 10 March 2012. ^ a b Holmes (2002). p. 25. ^ "History and Tour – Duke of Wellington". number10.gov.uk. Archived from the original on 1 June 2011. Retrieved 8 June 2011.  ^ Holmes (2002). p. 26. ^ Holmes (2002). p. 27. ^ The London Gazette: no. 13542. p. 555. 29 June 1793. Retrieved 10 March 2012. ^ Holmes (2002). p. 28. ^ The London Gazette: no. 13596. p. 1052. 23 November 1793. Retrieved 10 March 2012. ^ a b Holmes (2002). p. 30. ^ Holmes (2002). p. 31. ^ a b Holmes (2002). p. 32. ^ a b c Holmes (2002). p. 33. ^ The London Gazette: no. 13892. p. 460. 14 May 1796. Retrieved 10 March 2012. ^ Holmes (2002). p. 34. ^ Holmes (2002). p. 40. ^ a b Holmes (2002). p. 41. ^ Longford (1971). p. 54. Wellington's first signature as Arthur Wellesley was on a letter dated 19 May 1798. ^ Holmes (2002). p. 42. ^ a b Holmes (2002). p. 49. ^ Holmes (2002). p. 44. ^ a b Holmes (2002). p. 47. ^ Holmes (2002). p. 51. ^ a b Holmes (2002). p. 53. ^ Holmes (2002). p. 56. ^ Holmes (2002). p. 57. ^ "The Battle of Seringapatam: Chronology, Macquarie University". Archived from the original on 22 July 2008. Retrieved 17 June 2008.  ^ a b Holmes (2002). p. 58. ^ Bowring (1893). pp. 84–85. ^ Souvenir of Mysore Album. Curzon Collection. 1900. Retrieved 27 January 2015.  ^ Holmes (2002). p. 59. ^ Holmes (2002). p. 60. ^ Holmes (2002). p. 62. ^ Holmes (2002). p. 63. ^ Holmes (2002). p. 64. ^ Holmes (2002). p. 65. ^ Holmes (2002). p. 67. ^ a b c Holmes (2002). p. 69. ^ a b Holmes (2002). p. 73. ^ Holmes (2002). p. 74. ^ a b c Holmes (2002). p. 81. ^ a b Holmes (2002). p. 75. ^ a b Holmes (2002). p. 77. ^ a b Holmes (2002). p. 80. ^ Longford (1971). p. 93. ^ Millar (2006). p. 27. ^ a b Holmes (2002). p. 82. ^ Holmes (2002). p. 83. ^ Holmes (2002). p. 88. ^ a b Holmes (2002). p. 87. ^ Holmes (2002). p. 86. ^ a b c Holmes (2002). p. 84. ^ Holmes (2002). p. 85. ^ Roberts (2003). pp. xxiii. ^ a b c d e Neillands (2003). p. 38. ^ The London Gazette: no. 15908. p. 449. 8 April 1806. Retrieved 10 March 2012. ^ a b Longford (1971) p.174 ^ a b c Neillands (2003). p. 39. ^ Holmes (2002). pp. 102–103. ^ Longford (1971). pp. 148–154. ^ Longford (1971). pp. 155–157. ^ Holmes (2002). p. 124. ^ Longford (1971). p. 171. ^ Longford (1971). p. 172. ^ Longford (1971). p. 117. ^ Griffiths (1897). ^ Longford (2012). p. 118. ^ Gates (2002). p. 177. ^ Guedalla (1997). p. 186. ^ Longford (2012). p. 134. ^ Longford (2012). pp. 134–150. ^ Muir (2013). p. 343. ^ The London Gazette: no. 16291. p. 1342. 22 August 1809. Retrieved 22 August 2015. ^ Longford (1971). pp. 225–230. ^ Longford (1971). pp. 235–240. ^ Longford (2012). p. 163. ^ Longford (1971). pp. 251–254. ^ Longford (1971). p. 257. ^ Longford (1971). pp. 254–256. ^ Longford (2012). p. 168. ^ a b Holmes (2002). p. 162. ^ Longford (1971). pp. 283–287. ^ Holmes (2002). p. 168. ^ Gates (2002). p. 366. Notes: "While, in view of the developing strategic situation, is not clear what Wellesley hoped to gain by its seizure, he had resolved to take the fortress—a task which he evidently believed could be easily accomplished; for, notwithstanding the sanguinary lessons that virtually all his sieges had given him and the availability of scores of heavy cannon captured at Ciudad Rodrigo and Madrid, he brought up only eight heavy guns to breach the defences. This force was to prove lamentably inadequate and, in this and other aspects of the operation, Wellesley's complacency and ineptitude were to cost his troops dear." ^ Longford (1971). pp. 297–299. ^ Holmes (2002). p. 189. ^ Wellington to Bathurst, dispatches, p. 496. ^ Haythornthwaite (1998). p. 7. ^ Longford (1971). p. 332. ^ The London Gazette: no. 16934. p. 1850. 13 September 1814. Retrieved 10 March 2012. ^ Longford (1971). p. 336. ^ The London Gazette: no. 16934. p. 1851. 13 September 1814. Retrieved 10 March 2012. ^ Longford (1971). p. 342. ^ Longford (1971). pp. 344–345. ^ Longford (2012). p. 228. ^ The London Gazette: no. 16894. p. 936. 3 May 1814. Retrieved 10 March 2012. ^ "Bernard Cornwell – Britain's Storyteller". HarperCollins Publishers. Retrieved 13 October 2009.  ^ Tina Bicât (2003). Period Costume for the Stage. Ramsbury, UK: Crowood Press. pp. 65–66. ISBN 978-1-86126-589-0. ^ Dudley Mills, "The Duke of Wellington and the Peace Negotiations at Ghent in 1814," Canadian Historical Review (1921) 2#1 pp 19–32, quote at p. 22 ^ The London Gazette: no. 16915. p. 1389. 9 July 1814. Retrieved 10 March 2012. ^ The London Gazette: no. 16972. p. 18. 4 January 1815. Retrieved 10 March 2012. ^ Barbero (2005). p. 2. ^ Longford (1971). pp. 396–407. ^ Longford (1971). p. 410. ^ Longford (1971). pp. 423–432. ^ Hibbert (1997). pp. 175–176. ^ Adkin (2001). p. 37. ^ a b  Chisholm, Hugh, ed. (1911). "Waterloo Campaign". Encyclopædia Britannica 28 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. pp. 371–381.  ^ a b Siborne (1990). p. 439. ^ A number of different mounts could have been ridden by Napoleon at Waterloo: Ali, Crebère, Désirée, Jaffa, Marie and Tauris (Christopher J. Summerville (2007-07-13). Who Was Who at Waterloo: A Biography of the Battle. Pearson Education. p. 315. ISBN 978-0-582-78405-5. ) ^ Hofschröer (1999). p. 117 ^ a b Hofschröer (1999). p. 122. ^ Chandler (1987), p. 373. ^ Adkin (2001). p. 361.. ^ a b c Chesney (1907). pp. 178–179. ^ a b Parry (1900). p. 70. ^ Great Britain. Foreign Office, Great Britain (1838). British and foreign state papers. H.M.S.O. Retrieved 17 March 2012.  ^ Adkin (2001). p. 49. ^ Feldzug von 1815: Strategische Uebersicht des Feldzugs von 1815, in Carl von Clausewitz, Schriften—Aufsätze—Studien—Briefe, 2 volumes in 3, edited by Werner Hahlweg (Göttingen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht, 1966–90), volume 2, part 2: 936–1118. ^ Daniel Moran, "Clausewitz on Waterloo: Napoleon at Bay," in Carl von Clausewitz and Arthur Wellesley, 1st Duke of Wellesley, On Waterloo: Clausewitz, Wellesley, and the Campaign of 1815, ed./trans. Christopher Bassford, Daniel Moran, and Gregory W. Pedlow (Clausewitz.com, 2010). ISBN 1453701508 ^ Christopher Bassford, "Introduction," in Carl von Clausewitz and Arthur Wellesley, 1st Duke of Wellesley, On Waterloo: Clausewitz, Wellesley, and the Campaign of 1815, ed./trans. Christopher Bassford, Daniel Moran, and Gregory W. Pedlow (Clausewitz.com, 2010). ^ The London Gazette: no. 17434. p. 2325. 26 December 1818. Retrieved 10 March 2012. ^ The London Gazette: no. 17525. p. 1831. 16 October 1819. Retrieved 10 March 2012. ^ Holmes (2002). p. 268. ^ The London Gazette: no. 18327. p. 153. 23 January 1827. Retrieved 10 March 2012. ^ The London Gazette: no. 18335. p. 340. 13 February 1827. Retrieved 10 March 2012. ^ Holmes (2002). pp. 270–271. ^ The London Gazette: no. 18543. p. 129. 23 January 1829. Retrieved 10 March 2012. ^ Bloy, Marjorie (2011). "The Peel Web-Wellington's speeches on Catholic Emancipation". A Web of English History. Retrieved 6 April 2011.  ^ Hansard XIX, 11 March 1811. cc.350–356. ^ Holmes (2002). p. 277. ^ Thompson, N. Wellington after Waterloo, pg 95. ^ a b Holmes (2002). p. 275. ^ "The Duel: Wellington versus Winchilsea". King's College London. Retrieved 4 September 2008.  ^ a b "The Odious Imposts". Freeman's Journal and Daily Commercial Advertiser (Dublin, Ireland). 14 June 1830.  Notes: "If the Irish Question be lost, Ireland has her Representatives to accuse for it still more than the iron Duke and his worthy Chancellor" ^ a b "County Meetings". Freeman's Journal and Daily Commercial Advertiser (Dublin, Ireland). 16 June 1830.  Notes: "One fortnight will force the Iron Duke to abandon his project" ^ a b "Dublin, Monday, June 28". Freeman's Journal and Daily Commercial Advertiser (Dublin, Ireland). 28 June 1830.  Notes: "Let the 'Iron Duke' abandon the destructive scheme of Goulburn." ^ Bloy, Marjorie (2011). "Biography-Arthur Wellesley, first Duke of Wellington (1769–1852)". A Web of English History. Archived from the original on 7 June 2011. Retrieved 28 May 2011.  ^ a b "London". Freeman's Journal and Daily Commercial Advertiser (Dublin, Ireland). 14 June 1832.  Notes: "iron shutters are being fixed, of a strength and substance sufficient to resist a musket ball" ^ Holmes (2002). p. 281. ^ Holmes (2002). p. 283. ^ Holmes (2002). p. 288. ^ Wellesley Wellington (Duke of), Arthur (1854). The Speeches of the Duke of Wellington in Parliament, Volume 1 (1854). London: W. Clowes & Sons. pp. 671–674. Retrieved 10 March 2012.  ^ a b Holmes (2002). p. 289. ^ Holmes (2002). pp. 291–292. ^ The London Gazette: no. 20130. p. 2217. 16 August 1842. Retrieved 10 March 2012. ^ Holmes (2002). p. 96. ^ a b "BBC Two – Wellington: The Iron Duke Unmasked". BBC. Retrieved 10 May 2015.  ^ Holmes (2002), p. 206 ^ Holmes (2002). p. 292. ^ Bloy, Marjorie (2011). "Biography-Edward George Geoffrey Smith Stanley, 14th Earl of Derby (1799–1869)". A Web of English History. Archived from the original on 14 May 2011. Retrieved 6 April 2011.  ^ The London Gazette: no. 21132. p. 2396. 3 September 1850. Retrieved 10 March 2012. ^ The London Gazette: no. 15885. p. 128. 28 January 1806. Retrieved 10 March 2012. ^ The London Gazette: no. 18327. p. 154. 23 January 1827. Retrieved 10 March 2012. ^ Longford, Elizabeth Wellington-Pillar of State Weidenfeld and Nicholson (1972) p.281 ^ Longford (1972) p.95 ^ Longford (1972) p.296 ^ Longford (1972) p.297 ^ Corrigan (2006). p. 353. ^ a b Bloy, Marjorie (2011). "Biography-Arthur Wellesley, first Duke of Wellington (1769–1852)". A Web of English History. Archived from the original on 14 May 2011. Retrieved 6 April 2011.  ^ The Times, Thursday, 18 November 1852; p. 5; Issue 21276; col A: Funeral Of The Duke Of Wellington [Announcement of arrangements] and The Times, Friday, 19 November 1852; p. 5; Issue 21277; col A: [Report of the event]. ^ The London Gazette: no. 21381. p. 3079. 16 November 1852. Retrieved 10 March 2012. ^ Holmes (2002). p. 297. ^ "Model for Wellington Monument: Truth and Falsehood". Victoria and Albert Museum. Retrieved 21 September 2014.  ^ "Discover the Crypt". St Paul's Cathedral. Retrieved 27 February 2011.  ^ Dalton 1904, p. 77. ^ Joseph Drew (1814–1883), Biographical Sketch of the Military and Political Career of the Late Duke of Wellington, 1852 ^ Sinnema (2006). pp. 93–111. ^ John Cooper, Brian Howard Harrison (2002)."Great Britons: the great debate". p. 13. National Portrait Gallery, 2002 ^ "Preamble to History". Retrieved 12 March 2012.  ^ Roberts, Andrew (17 February 2011). "The Duke of Wellington: Soldiering to Glory". BBC. Retrieved 27 November 2009.  ^ Holmes (2002). p. 177. ^ Boys, Thomas Shotter (1852). "Duke of Wellington's bedroom". Retrieved 1 June 2011.  ^ Holmes (2002). p. 175. ^ Hibbert (1997). p. 111. ^ Longford (1971). p. 356. ^ Holmes (2002). p. 166. ^ Glover (2001). p. 334. ^ Dalton 1904, p. 9. ^ Gere (1981). p. 5. ^ Holmes (2002). pp. 250,254. ^ Montgomerie (1955). p. 31. ^ Cathcart, Brian (20 March 1994). "When Wellington said publish and be damned: The Field Marshal and the Scarlet Woman". London: The Independent. Retrieved 27 February 2011.  ^ Hibbert (1997). p. 389. ^ Longford (1971) pp. 211–2 ^ Holmes (2002). pp. xvi. ^ Rothenberg (1999). p. 136. ^ a b Holmes (2002). p. 92. ^ Robyn Williams interviews Medical Historian Dr Jim Leavesley (16 October 2005). "Ockham's Razor: 16 October 2005 – Horatio Nelson: 200th Anniversary of Trafalgar". abc.net.au. Retrieved 14 March 2012.  ^ Lambert (2005). p. 283. ^ Wellesley (2008). p. 14. ^ Wellesley (2008). pp. 14–15. ^ Longford (1971). p. 7. ^ Lundy, Darryl. "Sir Henry Colley". The Peerage.com. Retrieved 10 March 2012. [unreliable source?] ^ Lease dated 23 October 1554; Fiant no.53, Philip & Mary, cited in Appendix IV, 9th Report of the Deputy Keeper of Public Records in Ireland. ^ Journal of the Kildare Archaeological Society, Vol. X, No. 1, pp. 90–94. ^ "Surname index". Irish Times. Retrieved 17 March 2012.  ^ "Mac Amhalghaidh". Library of Ireland. Retrieved 10 March 2012.  ^ "The O'Clery Book of Genealogies, Analecta Hibernica #18, R.I.A. MS. 23 D 17". www.clanmaclochlainn.com. Retrieved 4 April 2008.  ^ Ball. F. Elrington The Judges in Ireland 1221–1921 John Murray London 1926 Vol. 1 p.203 ^ a b Ball p.203 ^ Mosley, ed. Burke's Peerage 107th Edition Delaware 2003 Vol.2 p.2971 ^ "Freeman's Journal and Daily Commercial Advertiser (Dublin, Ireland)". British Library. 18 May 1832. Archived from British Newspapers 1800–1900 the original Check |url= value (help) on 22 November 2011. Retrieved 17 March 2012.  ^ "BBC History". Retrieved 27 February 2011.  ^ R.E.Foster. "Mr Punch and the Iron Duke". Retrieved 29 May 2011.  ^ Holmes (2002). pp. 285–288, 302–303. ^ Rory Muir (2013). Wellington: Waterloo and the fortunes of peace, 1814–1852. p. 472.  ^ Cornwell, Bernard (2014). Waterloo – The History of Four Days, Three Armies and Three Battles. p. 10.  ^ a b Holmes (2002). p. 178. ^ Morgan (2004). p. 135. ^ Roberts, Andrew. "Napoleon & Wellington". Retrieved 2 June 2011.  ^ Roberts (2003). pp. 74, 78–79. ^ Scott, Wright (2006) p. 26. ^ "Wellington Boot History and Background". Retrieved 1 June 2011.  References[edit] Adkin, Mark (2001). The Waterloo Companion: The Complete Guide to History's Most Famous Land Battle. Aurum Press. ISBN 978-1-85410-764-0.  Barbero, Alessandro (2005). The Battle: A New History Of Waterloo. Walker & Company. ISBN 978-0-8027-1453-4.  Bowring, Lewin B. (1974). Haidar Ali and Tipu Sultan, And The Struggle With The Musalman Powers Of The South. Delli: Idarah-I Adabiyat-I. ISBN 978-81-206-1299-0.  Chesney, Charles C. (1907). Waterloo Lectures: A Study Of The Campaign Of 1815. Longmans, Green, and Co. ISBN 1-4286-4988-3.  Chandler, David (1987). Napoleon's Marshals. London: Weidenfeld & Nicolson. ISBN 0-297-79124-9.  Clausewitz, Carl von; Wellesley, Arthur, First Duke of Wellington (2010), Christopher Bassford, Daniel Moran, Gregory Pedlow, eds., On Waterloo: Clausewitz, Wellington, and the Campaign of 1815, Clausewitz.com, ISBN 978-1-4537-0150-8  This on-line text contains Clausewitz's 58-chapter study of the Campaign of 1815 and Wellington's lengthy 1842 essay written in response to Clausewitz, as well as supporting documents and essays by the editors. Corrigan, Gordon (2006). Wellington: A Military Life. London: Hambledon Continuum. ISBN 978-1-85285-515-4.  Dalton, Charles (1904). The Waterloo roll call. With biographical notes and anecdotes. London: Eyre and Spottiswoode.  Gates, David (2002). The Spanish Ulcer: A History of the Peninsular War. Pimlico. ISBN 978-0-7126-9730-9.  Gere, J.A. (1981). Sparrow, John, ed. Geoffrey Madan's Notebooks. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-215870-3.  Gifford, C.A. (1817). The Life of the Most Noble Arthur, Duke of Wellington. London: W.Lewis.  Glover, Michael (2001). The Peninsular War 1807–1814: A Concise Military History. London: Penguin Books. ISBN 978-0-14-139041-3.  Griffiths, Major Arthur (1897). The Wellington Memorial: Wellington, His Comrades and Contemporaries, chapters IV and 211. Ballantyne, Hanson & Co.  Guedalla, Philip (1997). The Duke. Wordsworth Editions. ISBN 978-1-85326-679-9.  Haythornthwaite, Philip J (1998). Weapons & Equipment of the Napoleonic Wars. London: Weidenfeld & Nicolson. ISBN 978-1-85409-495-7.  Hibbert, Christopher (1997). Wellington: A Personal History. Da Capo Press. ISBN 978-0-201-63232-3.  Hofschröer, Peter (1999). 1815: The Waterloo Campaign: The German Victory. Greenhill Books. ISBN 978-1-85367-368-9.  Holmes, Professor Richard (2002). Wellington: The Iron Duke. London: Harper Collins Publishers. ISBN 978-0-00-713750-3.  Lambert, Andrew (2005). Nelson: Britannia's God of War. London: Faber and Faber. ISBN 978-0-571-21227-9.  Longford, Elizabeth (1971). Wellington: The Years of The Sword. HarperCollins Publishers. ISBN 978-0-586-03548-1.  CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list (link) Longford, Elizabeth (2012). Wellington. London: Weidenfeld & Nicholson. ISBN 978-0-349-12350-9.  CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list (link) Millar, Simon (2006). Assaye 1803: Wellington's Bloodiest Battle. Osprey. ISBN 978-1-84603-001-7.  Montgomerie, Viva Seton (1955). My Scrapbook of Memories. Privately published.  Morgan, Matthew (2004). Wellington's Victories: A Guide to Sharpe's Army. London: Andrews McMeel Publishing. ISBN 978-1-84317-093-8.  Neillands, Robin (2003). Wellington & Napoleon: Clash of Arms. Pen & Sword Books. ISBN 978-0-85052-926-5.  O'Connell, Daniel (1844). Shaw's Authenticated Report of the Irish State Trials. H. Shaw.  Parry, D.H. (1900). Battle of the nineteenth century. 1. London: Cassell and Company.  Roberts, Andrew (2003). Napoleon and Wellington: The Long Duel. Phoenix. ISBN 978-0-7538-1390-4.  Rothenberg, Gunther E. (1999). Keegan, John, ed. The Napoleonic Wars. London: Cassell & Co. ISBN 978-0-304-35267-8.  Scott, Johnny; Wright, Clarissa D. (2006). Sunday Roast. Kyle Cathie. ISBN 978-1-85626-672-7.  Severn, John (2007). Architects of Empire: The Duke of Wellington and His Brothers. University of Oklahoma Press. ISBN 978-0-8061-3810-7.  Siborne, William (1990). The Waterloo Campaign. London: Greenhill Books. ISBN 1-85367-069-3.  Sinnema, Prof. Peter W. (2006). The Wake of Wellington: Englishness in 1852. Ohio University Press. ISBN 978-0-8214-1679-2.  Summerville, Christopher J (2007). Who was who at Waterloo: a biography of the battle. Pearson Education. ISBN 978-0-582-78405-5.  Wellesley, Jane (2008). Wellington: A Journey Through My Family. London: Orion Publishing Group. ISBN 978-0-297-85231-5.  Freeman's Journal and Daily Commercial Advertiser (1830). Dublin, Ireland. Further reading[edit] Brett-James, Antony. ed. (1961). Wellington at War 1794–1815. New York: St. Martin's Press.  Bryant, Arthur (1972). The Great Duke: Or, The Invincible General. Morrow. OCLC 410380.  Coates, Berwick (2003). Wellington's Charge: A Portrait of the Duke's England. London: Robson Books. ISBN 978-1-86105-653-5.  Davies, Huw (2012). Wellington's War: The Making of a Military Genius. Yale University Press. ISBN 978-0-300-16417-6.  Ellis, Peter Berresford (2000). The Celtic Revolution: A Study in Anti-Imperialism. Talybont, Wales: Y LotraCyf. ISBN 978-0-86243-096-2.  Harrington, Jack (2011). Sir John Malcolm and the Creation of British India. New York: Palgrave Macmillan. ISBN 978-0-230-10885-1.  Hilbert, Charles (2005). Arthur Wellesley, Duke of Wellington, time and conflicts in India on behalf of the British East India Company and the British crown. 7. Military Heritage.  Hutchinson, Lester (1964). European Freebooters in Mogul India. New York: Asia Publishing House.  Muir, Rory. Wellington: The Path to Victory 1769–1814 (2013) vol 1 of two-volume scholarly biography excerpt and text search Snow, Peter (2010). To War with Wellington, from the Peninsula to Waterloo. London: John Murray. ISBN 978-1-84854-103-0.  Ward, S.G.P. (1957). Wellington's Headquarters: A Study of the Administrative Problems in the Peninsula 1809–1814. Oxford University Press.  Weller, Jac (1998). Wellington at Waterloo. London: Greenhill Books. ISBN 978-1-85367-339-9.   Chisholm, Hugh, ed. (1911). "Wellington, Arthur Wellesley, 1st Duke of". Encyclopædia Britannica 28 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. pp. 507–512.  Primary sources[edit] Wellesley, Arthur; Gurwood, John (1838). The dispatches of Field Marshal the Duke of Wellington: During his various campaigns in India, Denmark, Portugal, Spain, the Low Countries, and France, from 1799 to 1818 Vol. X.. London: John Murray.  External links[edit] Find more about Arthur Wellesley, 1st Duke of Wellington at Wikipedia's sister projects Definitions from Wiktionary Media from Commons News stories from Wikinews Quotations from Wikiquote Source texts from Wikisource Textbooks from Wikibooks Learning resources from Wikiversity Lundy, Darryl. "p. 10256 § 102559". The Peerage.  Duke of Wellington's Regiment – West Riding The Wellington Papers Database at the University of Southampton Works by Arthur Wellesley at Project Gutenberg Works by or about Arthur Wellesley, 1st Duke of Wellington at Internet Archive Works by Arthur Wellesley, 1st Duke of Wellington at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks) Duke of Wellington At Find A Grave More about Arthur Wellesley, Duke of Wellington on the Downing Street website Hansard 1803–2005: contributions in Parliament by the Duke of Wellington napoleonistyka.atspace.com. "Arthur Wellesley, Duke of Wellington". Napoleon, His Army and Enemies.  Portraits of Arthur Wellesley, 1st Duke of Wellington at the National Portrait Gallery, London Archival material relating to Arthur Wellesley, 1st Duke of Wellington listed at the UK National Archives Parliament of Ireland Preceded by Hon. William Wellesley-Pole John Pomeroy Member of Parliament for Trim 1790–1797 With: John Pomeroy 1790–1791 Hon. Clotworthy Taylor 1791–1795 Hon. Henry Wellesley 1795 William Arthur Crosbie 1795–1797 Succeeded by Sir Chichester Fortescue William Arthur Crosbie Parliament of the United Kingdom Preceded by Thomas Davis Lamb Sir Charles Talbot Member of Parliament for Rye 1806 With: Sir Charles Talbot Succeeded by Patrick Crauford Bruce Michael Angelo Taylor Preceded by Samuel Boddington Member of Parliament for Tralee May 1807 – July 1807 Succeeded by Evan Foulkes Preceded by Sir Christopher Hawkins Frederick William Trench Member of Parliament for Mitchell 1807 With: Henry Conyngham Montgomery Succeeded by Edward Leveson-Gower George Galway Mills Preceded by Isaac Corry Sir John Doyle Member of Parliament for Newport (Isle of Wight) 1807–1809 With: The Viscount Palmerston Succeeded by The Viscount Palmerston Sir Leonard Thomas Worsley-Holmes Political offices Preceded by William Elliot Chief Secretary for Ireland 1807–1809 Succeeded by Robert Dundas Preceded by The Earl of Mulgrave Master-General of the Ordnance 1819–1827 Succeeded by The Marquess of Anglesey Preceded by The Viscount Goderich Prime Minister of the United Kingdom 22 January 1828 – 16 November 1830 Succeeded by The Earl Grey Leader of the House of Lords 1828–1830 Preceded by Viscount Duncannon Home Secretary (Caretaker) 1834 Succeeded by Henry Goulburn Preceded by Thomas Spring Rice Secretary of State for War and the Colonies (Caretaker) 1834 Succeeded by The Earl of Aberdeen Preceded by The Viscount Palmerston Foreign Secretary 1834–1835 Succeeded by The Viscount Palmerston Preceded by The Viscount Melbourne Prime Minister of the United Kingdom (Caretaker) 14 November 1834 – 10 December 1834 Succeeded by Sir Robert Peel Leader of the House of Lords 1834–1835 Succeeded by The Viscount Melbourne Leader of the House of Lords 1841–1846 Succeeded by The Marquess of Lansdowne Party political offices First None recognised before Leader of the Conservative Party 1828–1834 Succeeded by Sir Robert Peel, Bt Leader of the Conservative Party in the House of Lords 1828–1846 Succeeded by The Lord Stanley Diplomatic posts Vacant Napoleonic Wars Title last held by The Lord Whitworth of Newport Pratt British Ambassador to France 1814–1815 Succeeded by Sir Charles Stuart Academic offices Preceded by Baron Grenville Chancellor of the University of Oxford 1834–1852 Succeeded by Earl of Derby Military offices Preceded by The Marquess Cornwallis Colonel of the 33rd (the 1st Yorkshire West Riding) Regiment of Foot 1806–1813 Succeeded by Sir John Sherbrooke Preceded by The Duke of Northumberland Colonel of the Royal Regiment of Horse Guards (The Blues) 1813–1827 Succeeded by The Duke of Cumberland Preceded by The Duke of Richmond Governor of Plymouth 1819–1827 Succeeded by The Earl Harcourt Preceded by Sir David Dundas Colonel-in-Chief of the Rifle Brigade 1820–1852 Succeeded by Prince Albert Preceded by The Duke of York Commander-in-Chief of the Forces 1827–1828 Succeeded by The Lord Hill Colonel of the Grenadier Guards 1827–1852 Succeeded by Prince Albert Preceded by The Viscount Hill Commander-in-Chief of the Forces 1842–1852 Succeeded by The Viscount Hardinge Honorary titles Preceded by The Earl of Malmesbury Lord Lieutenant of Hampshire 1820–1852 Succeeded by The Marquess of Winchester Preceded by The Marquess of Hastings Constable of the Tower Lord Lieutenant of the Tower Hamlets 1827–1852 Succeeded by The Viscount Combermere Preceded by The Earl of Liverpool Lord Warden of the Cinque Ports 1829–1852 Succeeded by The Marquess of Dalhousie Peerage of the United Kingdom New creation Duke of Wellington 1814–1852 Succeeded by Arthur Richard Wellesley Marquess Douro 1814–1852 Marquess of Wellington 1812–1852 Earl of Wellington 1812–1852 Viscount Wellington 1809–1852 Baron Douro 1809–1852 Portuguese nobility New creation Duke of Vitória 1812–1852 Succeeded by Arthur Richard Wellesley Marquis of Torres Vedras 1812–1852 Count of Vimeiro 1811–1852 Spanish nobility New creation Duke of Ciudad Rodrigo 1812–1852 Succeeded by Arthur Richard Wellesley Dutch nobility New creation Prince of Waterloo 1815–1852 Succeeded by Arthur Richard Wellesley v t e Arthur Wellesley, 1st Duke of Wellington Family Father: Garret Wesley, 1st Earl of Mornington Mother: Anne Hill Brothers: Richard Wellesley, 1st Marquess Wellesley William Wellesley-Pole, 3rd Earl of Mornington Henry Wellesley, 1st Baron Cowley Sister: Lady Anne Smith Wife: Catherine Wellesley, Duchess of Wellington Children: Arthur Charles Battles and wars Flanders Campaign Battle of Boxtel Fourth Anglo-Mysore War Battle of Seringapatam Second Anglo-Maratha War Battle of Assaye Peninsular War Battle of Roliça Battle of Vimeiro Second Battle of Porto Battle of Talavera Battle of Sabugal Third Siege of Badajoz Battle of Salamanca Battle of Vitoria Hundred Days Battle of Waterloo Homes Apsley House Stratfield Saye House Walmer Castle Memorials Wellington Arch Wellington's Column Wellington Monuments Dublin London Somerset Wellington College, Berkshire Statues Aldershot Glasgow London Royal Exchange Hyde Park Corner   Arthur Wellesley navigational boxes v t e Napoleonic Wars Third Coalition Fourth Coalition Peninsular War Fifth Coalition French Invasion of Russia Sixth Coalition Seventh Coalition Belli- gerents France, client states and allies France Polish Legions Italy Holland Etruria Swiss Confederation Naples Confederation of the Rhine Bavaria Saxony Westphalia Württemberg Denmark–Norway Ottoman Empire Persia Spain Coalition forces United Kingdom Austria Russia Prussia Spain Portugal Sicily Papal States Ottoman Empire Persia Sardinia Sweden Netherlands Brunswick Hanover Nassau French Royalists Major battles Prelude French Revolution First Coalition Second Coalition 18 Brumaire Planned invasion of the United Kingdom Duc d'Enghien Execution Coronation of Napoleon 1805 Diamond Rock Cape Finisterre Wertingen Günzburg Haslach-Jungingen Elchingen Ulm Verona Trafalgar Caldiero Cape Ortegal Amstetten Dürenstein Schöngrabern Austerlitz 1806 Gaeta Campo Tenese Maida Schleiz Saalfeld Jena–Auerstedt Erfurt Halle Magdeburg Prenzlau Pasewalk Stettin Waren-Nossentin Lübeck Greater Poland Uprising Hameln Czarnowo Golymin Pułtusk 1807 Mohrungen Stralsund Eylau Ostrołęka Kolberg Danzig Mileto Guttstadt-Deppen Heilsberg Friedland Invasion of Portugal 1808 Dos de Mayo Bruch Rosily Squadron Cabezón 1st Zaragoza Valencia Medina de Rioseco Bailén Roliça Vimeiro Pancorbo Valmaseda Burgos Espinosa Tudela Somosierra 2nd Zaragoza Sahagún Benavente 1809 Castellón Uclés Corunna Valls Tyrolean Rebellion Villafranca Yevenes/Yébenes Ciudad Real 1st Porto Medellín Bergisel Sacile Teugen-Hausen Raszyn Abensberg Landshut Eckmühl Ratisbon Neumarkt-Sankt Veit Dalmatian Campaign Ebelsberg Gerona Piave River Grijó 2nd Porto Wörgl Tarvis Aspern-Essling Alcañiz Sankt Michael Stralsund Raab María Graz Wagram Korneuburg Stockerau Gefrees Hollabrunn Schöngrabern Armistice of Znaim Talavera Walcheren Campaign Ölper Almonacid Tamames Ocaña Alba de Tormes 1810 Cádiz Astorga Ciudad Rodrigo Barquilla Côa Almeida Bussaco 1811 Gebora Barrosa Pombal Redinha Casal Novo Campo Maior Sabugal Almeida Fuentes de Oñoro Tarragona Albuera Usagre Saguntum Arroyo dos Molinos Valencia 1812 Ciudad Rodrigo Badajoz Villagarcia Almaraz Maguilla Mir Salamanca García Hernández Saltanovka Ostrovno Vitebsk Klyastitsy Majadahonda Smolensk 1st Polotsk Valutino Mesoten Borodino Burgos Tarutino 2nd Polotsk Venta del Pozo Maloyaroslavets Chashniki Vyazma Smoliani Krasnoi Berezina 1813 Castalla Lützen Bautzen Tarragona Luckau Vitoria San Sebastián Pyrenees Sorauren Großbeeren Katzbach Dresden 1st Kulm San Marcial Dennewitz 2nd Kulm Göhrde Bidassoa Leipzig Hanau Nivelle Bornhöved Sehested 1814 Brienne La Rothière Mincio River Champaubert Montmirail Château-Thierry Vauchamps Garris Mormant Montereau Orthez Bar-sur-Aube Laon Reims Craonne Arcis-sur-Aube Fère-Champenoise Saint-Dizier Montmartre Paris Toulouse Bayonne 1815 Panaro Occhiobello Carpi Casaglia Ronco Cesenatico Pesaro Scapezzano Tolentino Ancona Castel di Sangro San Germano Gaeta Quatre Bras Ligny Waterloo Wavre Rocheserviere La Suffel Rocquencourt Issy Info French and ally military and political leaders Napoleon Louis-Alexandre Berthier Joachim Murat Louis-Nicolas Davout Jean Lannes André Masséna Michel Ney Jean-de-Dieu Soult Jean-Baptiste Bessières Pierre-Charles Villeneuve Joseph I Louis Bonaparte Jérôme Bonaparte Prince Poniatowski Prince Eugène Maximilian I Joseph of Bavaria Frederick Augustus I of Saxony Frederick I of Württemberg Frederick VI of Denmark Coalition military and political leaders Duke of Wellington Horatio Nelson Francis II, Holy Roman Emperor Archduke Charles Prince von Schwarzenberg Archduke John of Austria Alexander I of Russia Mikhail Kutuzov Michael Andreas Barclay de Tolly Count Bennigsen Pyotr Bagration Frederick William III of Prussia Gebhard von Blücher Duke of Brunswick Prince of Hohenlohe Ferdinand VII of Spain Miguel de Álava Maria I of Portugal Prince Regent John of Portugal Count of Feira William, Prince of Orange Ferdinand I of the Two Sicilies Gustav IV Adolf of Sweden Prince Charles John of Sweden Louis XVIII of France Related conflicts English Wars Gunboat War Dano-Swedish War Pomeranian War (Franco-Swedish War) Russo-Persian War Russo-Turkish War Finnish War Anglo-Turkish War Anglo-Russian War Anglo-Swedish War War of 1812 Swedish–Norwegian War Treaties Campo Formio Lunéville Amiens Artlenburg Pressburg Finckenstein Tilsit Cintra Schönbrunn Paris (1810) Tauroggen Ried Chaumont Kiel Mantua Casalanza Paris (1815) Miscellaneous Bibliography Continental System England expects that every man will do his duty Casualties Grande Armée Longwood House Bourbon Restoration Portal Military History definition media quotes v t e Conservative Party   History History of the Conservative Party History of conservatism in Great Britain Tories Tamworth Manifesto Carlton Club Primrose League General election manifestos Conservative Party Archive Trust Liberal Unionist Party Irish Unionist Party Scottish Unionist Party National Liberal Party   Leadership House of Lords (1828–1922) The Duke of Wellington The Earl of Derby The Earl of Malmesbury The Lord Cairns The Duke of Richmond, Lennox & Gordon The Earl of Beaconsfield The Marquess of Salisbury The Duke of Devonshire The Marquess of Lansdowne The Marquess Curzon of Kedleston House of Commons (1834–1922) Sir Robert Peel The Lord George Bentinck Marquess of Granby vacant (1848–1849) Benjamin Disraeli / Marquess of Granby / John Charles Herries Benjamin Disraeli Sir Stafford Northcote Sir Michael Hicks Beach The Lord Randolph Churchill W. H. Smith Arthur Balfour Andrew Bonar Law Sir Austen Chamberlain Leaders (1922–) Andrew Bonar Law Stanley Baldwin Neville Chamberlain Sir Winston Churchill Sir Anthony Eden Harold Macmillan Sir Alec Douglas-Home Edward Heath Margaret Thatcher John Major William Hague Iain Duncan Smith Michael Howard David Cameron Chairmen (1911–) Steel-Maitland Younger Jackson Davidson Chamberlain Baird Hacking Dugdale Assheton Woolton Poole Hailsham Butler Macleod / Poole Blakenham du Cann Barber Thomas Carrington Whitelaw Thorneycroft Parkinson Gummer Tebbit Brooke Baker Patten Fowler Hanley Mawhinney Parkinson Ancram Davis May Fox / Saatchi Maude Spelman Pickles Warsi / Feldman Shapps / Feldman Feldman   Leadership elections 1965 (Heath) 1975 (Thatcher) 1989 1990 (Major) 1995 1997 (Hague) 2001 (Duncan Smith) 2003 (Howard) 2005 (Cameron) Next (TBD)   Party structures Professional Party Conservative Campaign Headquarters Conservative Press Office Conservative Research Department Conservative Treasurer's Department Conservative Business Relations Voluntary Party Office of the Voluntary Party National Conservative Convention Association of Conservative Clubs Conservative Future Conservative Women's Organisation Conservatives Abroad Parliamentary Party 1922 Committee Conservative Chief Whip's Office Other Conservative Party Archive Associate organisations Subnational parties Northern Ireland Conservatives Scottish Conservative Party Welsh Conservative Party Directly elected city mayoral authorities London Conservatives   Ideological and interest groups The Atlantic Bridge Conservative Animal Welfare Group Conservative Christian Fellowship Conservative Countryside Forum Conservative Disability Group Conservative Europe Group Conservative Friends of America Conservative Friends of Gibraltar Conservative Friends of Israel Conservative Friends of Turkey Conservative History Group Conservative Humanist Association Conservative Mainstream Conservative Medical Society Conservative Muslim Forum Conservative National Education Society Conservative National Property Advisory Committee Conservative Rural Action Group Conservative Technology Forum Conservative Trade Unionists Conservative Transport Group Conservative Way Forward Conservative Women National Committee Conservatives 4 Cities Conservatives at Work Conservatives for International Travel Cornerstone Group Countryside Alliance European Foundation Fresh Start LGBTory Macleod Group Margaret Thatcher Foundation Monday Club 92 Group No Campaign No Turning Back Selsdon Group Tory Green Initiative Tory Reform Group Renewing One Nation Young Britons' Foundation   Think tanks Bow Group Bright Blue Bruges Group Centre for Policy Studies Centre for Social Justice European Foundation (think tank) Policy Exchange Society of Conservative Lawyers   Alliances Current ECR/AECR IDU (EDU) EDG Former ECG ED EPP-ED MER AOE UCUNF (UUP) Conservatism portal v t e Commanders-in-Chief of the Forces and Chiefs of the General Staff of the British Army Commanders-in-Chief of the Forces Duke of Albemarle Duke of Monmouth Earl of Marlborough Duke of Leinster Duke of Marlborough Duke of Ormonde Earl of Stair George Wade Duke of Cumberland Viscount Ligionier Marquess of Granby Lord Amherst Henry Conway Lord Amherst Duke of York Sir David Dundas Duke of York Duke of Wellington Viscount Hill Duke of Wellington Viscount Hardinge Duke of Cambridge Viscount Wolseley Earl Roberts Chief of the General Staff Sir Neville Lyttelton Chiefs of the Imperial General Staff Sir William Nicholson Sir John French Sir Charles Douglas Sir James Murray Sir Archibald Murray Sir William Robertson Sir Henry Wilson The Earl of Cavan Sir George Milne Sir Archibald Montgomery-Massingberd Sir Cyril Deverell The Viscount Gort Sir Edmund Ironside Sir John Dill Sir Alan Brooke The Viscount Montgomery of Alamein Sir William Slim Sir John Harding Sir Gerald Templer Sir Francis Festing Sir Richard Hull Chiefs of the General Staff Sir Richard Hull Sir James Cassels Sir Geoffrey Baker Sir Michael Carver Sir Peter Hunt Sir Roland Gibbs Sir Edwin Bramall Sir John Stanier Sir Nigel Bagnall Sir John Chapple Sir Peter Inge Sir Charles Guthrie Sir Roger Wheeler Sir Michael Walker Sir Mike Jackson Sir Richard Dannatt Sir David Richards Sir Peter Wall Sir Nick Carter v t e Home Secretaries of the United Kingdom Secretary of State for the Home Department Shelburne Townshend North Temple Sydney Grenville Dundas Portland Pelham Yorke Hawkesbury Spencer Liverpool Ryder Sidmouth Peel Sturges Bourne Lansdowne Peel Melbourne Duncannon Wellington Goulburn Russell Normanby Graham Grey Walpole Palmerston Grey Walpole Sotheron-Estcourt Lewis Grey Walpole Hardy Bruce Lowe Cross Harcourt Cross Childers Matthews Asquith Ridley Ritchie Akers-Douglas Gladstone Churchill McKenna Simon Samuel Cave Shortt Bridgeman Henderson Joynson-Hicks Clynes Samuel Gilmour Simon Hoare Anderson Morrison Somervell Chuter Ede Maxwell-Fyfe Lloyd George Butler Brooke Soskice Jenkins Callaghan Maudling Carr Jenkins Rees Whitelaw Brittan Hurd Waddington Baker K. Clarke Howard Straw Blunkett C. Clarke Reid Smith Johnson May v t e Foreign Secretaries of the United Kingdom Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs Fox Grantham Fox Temple Leeds Grenville Hawkesbury Harrowby Mulgrave Fox Howick Canning Bathurst Wellesley Castlereagh Canning Dudley Aberdeen Palmerston Wellington Palmerston Aberdeen Palmerston Granville Malmesbury Russell Clarendon Malmesbury Russell Clarendon Stanley Clarendon Granville Derby Salisbury Granville Salisbury Rosebery Iddesleigh Salisbury Rosebery Kimberley Salisbury Lansdowne Grey Balfour Curzon MacDonald Chamberlain Henderson Reading Simon Hoare Eden Halifax Eden Bevin Morrison Eden Macmillan Lloyd Home Butler Gordon Walker Stewart Brown Stewart Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs Stewart Douglas-Home Callaghan Crosland Owen Carrington Pym Howe Major Hurd Rifkind Cook Straw Beckett Miliband Hague Hammond Book:Secretaries of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs Category:British Secretaries of State Portal:United Kingdom v t e List of Prime Ministers of Great Britain and the United Kingdom Kingdom of Great Britain Walpole Wilmington Pelham Newcastle Devonshire Newcastle Bute G Grenville Rockingham Chatham (Pitt the Elder) Grafton North Rockingham Shelburne Portland Pitt the Younger United Kingdom Pitt the Younger Addington Pitt the Younger W Grenville Portland Perceval Liverpool Canning Goderich Wellington Grey Melbourne Wellington Peel Melbourne Peel Russell Derby Aberdeen Palmerston Derby Palmerston Russell Derby Disraeli Gladstone Beaconsfield (Disraeli) Gladstone Salisbury Gladstone Salisbury Gladstone Rosebery Salisbury Balfour Campbell-Bannerman Asquith Lloyd George Law Baldwin MacDonald Baldwin MacDonald Baldwin Chamberlain Churchill Attlee Churchill Eden Macmillan Douglas-Home Wilson Heath Wilson Callaghan Thatcher Major Blair Brown Cameron Book Category Commons v t e Cabinet of Prime Minister Sir Robert Peel (1834–1835) Prime Minister of the United Kingdom Leader of the House of Commons Chancellor of the Exchequer Sir Robert Peel Lord Chancellor The Lord Lyndhurst Lord President of the Council The Earl of Rosslyn Foreign Secretary Leader of the House of Lords The Duke of Wellington Home Secretary Henry Goulburn First Lord of the Admiralty The Earl de Grey Lord Privy Seal The Lord Wharncliffe Secretary of State for War and the Colonies The Earl of Aberdeen Master-General of the Ordnance Sir George Murray President of the Board of Trade Master of the Mint Alexander Baring President of the Board of Control The Earl of Ellenborough Paymaster of the Forces Sir Edward Knatchbull Secretary at War John Charles Herries v t e Dukes of Wellington Arthur Wellesley, 1st Duke (1814–1852) Arthur Wellesley, 2nd Duke (1852–1884) Henry Wellesley, 3rd Duke (1884–1900) Arthur Wellesley, 4th Duke (1900–1934) Arthur Wellesley, 5th Duke (1934–1941) Henry Wellesley, 6th Duke (1941–1943) Gerald Wellesley, 7th Duke (1943–1972) Valerian Wellesley, 8th Duke (1972–2014) Charles Wellesley, 9th Duke (from 2014) Authority control WorldCat Identities VIAF: 2465308 LCCN: n80034909 ISNI: 0000 0001 2117 7890 GND: 118806645 SUDOC: 027448452 BNF: cb11887871r (data) ULAN: 500088735 NDL: 00715461 CiNii: DA03001881 Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Arthur_Wellesley,_1st_Duke_of_Wellington&oldid=718484672" Categories: Arthur Wellesley, 1st Duke of Wellington 1769 births 1852 deaths Wellesley family 18th-century Irish people 19th-century Irish people 33rd Regiment of Foot officers 73rd Regiment of Foot officers Anglo-Irish people Irish expatriates in the Netherlands Irish expatriates in India Irish expatriates in Spain Irish expatriates in Portugal Irish expatriates in France Irish expatriates in England British Army commanders of the Napoleonic Wars British Army personnel of the French Revolutionary Wars British field marshals British military personnel of the Second Anglo-Maratha War British military personnel of the Fourth Anglo-Mysore War British Secretaries of State for Foreign Affairs British Secretaries of State Burials at St Paul's Cathedral Chancellors of the University of Oxford Diplomatic peers Duellists Duke of Wellington's Regiment officers Dukes da Vitória Dukes of Ciudad Rodrigo Dukes of Wellington Dutch nobility Fellows of the Royal Society Field marshals of Russia Grenadier Guards officers Irish Anglicans Irish officers in the British Army Irish MPs 1790–97 Leaders of the Conservative Party (UK) Lord High Constables Lord-Lieutenants of Hampshire Lord-Lieutenants of the Tower Hamlets Lords Warden of the Cinque Ports Members of the Parliament of Ireland (pre-1801) Members of the Privy Council of Ireland Members of the Privy Council of the United Kingdom Members of the Parliament of the United Kingdom for English constituencies Members of the Parliament of the United Kingdom for Irish constituencies (1801–1922) People educated at Eton College People associated with King's College London People from County Dublin Cotiote War British Army personnel of the Peninsular War Prime Ministers of the United Kingdom Princes of Waterloo Regency era Royal Horse Guards officers UK MPs 1806–07 UK MPs 1807–12 Younger sons of earls Ambassadors of the United Kingdom to France Members of Trinity House Field marshals of Portugal Chief Secretaries for Ireland Tory Prime Ministers of the United Kingdom Commissioners of the Treasury for Ireland Knights of the Garter Knights Grand Cross of the Order of the Bath Knights Grand Cross of the Royal Guelphic Order Knights Grand Cross of the Military William Order Knights Grand Cross of the Order of the Sword Grand Crosses of the Order of the Tower and Sword Knights of the Golden Fleece Knights of the Order of Saint Januarius Recipients of the Order of St. Andrew Recipients of the Order of St. George of the First Degree Recipients of the Order of the Black Eagle Recipients of the Military Merit Order (Württemberg) Supernumerary Knights of the Order of the Holy Spirit Grand Crosses of the Military Order of Max Joseph Recipients of the Waterloo Medal Recipients of the Army Gold Cross Commanders Grand Cross of the Order of the Sword Knights Grand Cross of the Order of Saint Ferdinand and of Merit Knights Grand Cross of the Order of Saint Januarius Hidden categories: Articles incorporating Cite DNB template Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica without Wikisource reference All articles lacking reliable references Articles lacking reliable references from February 2013 Pages with URL errors Use British English from October 2014 Use dmy dates from October 2012 CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list Wikipedia articles with VIAF identifiers Wikipedia articles with LCCN identifiers Wikipedia articles with ISNI identifiers Wikipedia articles with GND identifiers Wikipedia articles with BNF identifiers Wikipedia articles with ULAN identifiers Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Article Talk Variants Views Read Edit View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Featured content Current events Random article Donate to Wikipedia Wikipedia store Interaction Help About Wikipedia Community portal Recent changes Contact page Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Cite this page Print/export Create a book Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikisource Languages Afrikaans العربية Asturianu Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца)‎ Български Bosanski Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Frysk Gaeilge Gàidhlig Galego 한국어 Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ქართული Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Lumbaart Magyar Македонски മലയാളം मराठी Bahasa Melayu မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Polski Português Română Русский Scots Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் ไทย Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 吴语 Yorùbá 中文 Edit links This page was last modified on 3 May 2016, at 19:51. Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view