Self-portrait - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Self-portrait From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to: navigation, search For other uses, see Self-portrait (disambiguation). Raphael, c. 1517–1518, Uffizi Gallery A self-portrait is a representation of an artist that is drawn, painted, photographed, or sculpted by that artist. Although self-portraits have been made since the earliest times, it is not until the Early Renaissance in the mid-15th century that artists can be frequently identified depicting themselves as either the main subject, or as important characters in their work. With better and cheaper mirrors, and the advent of the panel portrait, many painters, sculptors and printmakers tried some form of self-portraiture. Portrait of a Man in a Turban by Jan van Eyck of 1433 may well be the earliest known panel self-portrait.[1] He painted a separate portrait of his wife, and he belonged to the social group that had begun to commission portraits, already more common among wealthy Netherlanders than south of the Alps. The genre is venerable, but not until the Renaissance, with increased wealth and interest in the individual as a subject, did it become truly popular.[2] Contents 1 Types 1.1 Gallery: Inserted self-portraits 1.2 Women painters 2 Antiquity 3 Asia 4 European art 4.1 Albrecht Dürer, 1471–1528, the first prolific self-portraitist 4.2 Renaissance and Baroque 4.3 Rembrandt and the 17th century in Northern Europe 4.4 After Rembrandt 4.5 Prolific modern self-portraitists 5 Self-portraits in general 5.1 Gallery: painters at work 5.2 Classification 5.3 Mirrors and poses 5.4 Gallery: mortality in the self-portrait 5.5 Other meanings, storytelling 5.6 Self-promotion 6 Diagnosing the self-portrait 7 Collections 7.1 Gallery 7.2 Photo-portraits 7.3 Drawings, prints and engravings 8 See also 9 Notes and references 10 Further reading 10.1 Not in English 10.2 Self-portrait in neurology 10.3 Psychology of self-perception 11 External links Types[edit] Pieter Claesz, Vanitas with Violin and Glass Ball, the artist is visible in the reflection, 1625. A self-portrait may be a portrait of the artist, or a portrait included in a larger work, including a group portrait. Many painters are said to have included depictions of specific individuals, including themselves, in painting figures in religious or other types of composition. Such paintings were not intended publicly to depict the actual persons as themselves, but the facts would have been known at the time to artist and patron, creating a talking point as well as a public test of the artist's skill.[3] In the earliest surviving examples of medieval and renaissance self-portraiture, historical or mythical scenes (from the Bible or classical literature) were depicted using a number of actual persons as models, often including the artist, giving the work a multiple function as portraiture, self-portraiture and history/myth painting. In these works, the artist usually appears as a face in the crowd or group, often towards the edges or corner of the work and behind the main participants. Rubens's The Four Philosophers (1611–12)[4] is a good example. This culminated in the 17th century with the work of Jan de Bray. Many artistic media have been used; apart from paintings, drawings and prints have been especially important. In the famous Arnolfini Portrait (1434), Jan van Eyck is probably one of two figures glimpsed in a mirror – a surprisingly modern conceit. The Van Eyck painting may have inspired Diego Velázquez to depict himself in full view as the painter creating Las Meninas (1656), as the Van Eyck hung in the palace in Madrid where he worked. This was another modern flourish, given that he appears as the painter (previously unseen in official royal portraiture) and standing close to the King's family group who were the supposed main subjects of the painting.[5] In what may be one of the earliest childhood self-portraits now surviving, Albrecht Dürer depicts himself as in naturalistic style as a 13-year-old boy in 1484. In later years he appears variously as a merchant in the background of Biblical scenes and as Christ.[6] Leonardo da Vinci may have drawn a picture of himself at the age of 60, in around 1512. The picture is often straightforwardly reproduced as Da Vinci's appearance, although this is not certain. In the 17th century, Rembrandt painted a range of self-portraits. In The Prodigal Son in the Tavern (c1637), one of the earliest self-portraits with family, the painting probably includes Saskia, Rembrandt's wife, one of the earliest depictions of a family member by a famous artist. Family and professional group paintings, including the artist's depiction, became increasingly common from the 17th century on. From the later 20th century on, video plays an increasing part in self-portraiture, and adds the dimension of audio as well, allowing the person to speak to us in their own voice. Gallery: Inserted self-portraits[edit] Sandro Botticelli's painting of the Adoration of the Magi has an "inserted self-portrait". The position in the (right) corner, and the gaze out to the viewer, are very typical of such self-portraits. Masaccio inserted self-portrait from the Brancacci Chapel frescoes (as is the Filippino Lippi), 1424-6. Piero della Francesca as a sleeping soldier in his Resurrection, 1463, fresco, Sansepolcro.[7] Filippino Lippi as a figure in his Martyrdom of Saint Peter, fresco, 1481–82, Brancacci Chapel, Florence. He is at the extreme right of a crowded composition.[8] Women painters[edit] Women artists are notable producers of self-portraits; almost all significant women painters have left an example, from Caterina van Hemessen to the prolific Elisabeth Vigée-Lebrun, and Frida Kahlo, as well as Alice Neel, Paula Modersohn-Becker and Jenny Saville who painted themselves in the nude. Vigée-Lebrun painted a total of 37 self-portraits, many of which were copies of earlier ones, painted for sale. Until the 20th century women were usually unable to train in drawing the nude, which made it difficult for them to paint large figure compositions, leading many artists to specialize in portrait work. Women artists have historically embodied a number of roles within their self-portraiture. Most common is the artist at work, showing themselves in the act of painting, or at least holding a brush and palette. Often, the viewer wonders if the clothes worn were those they normally painted in, as the elaborate nature of many ensembles was an artistic choice to show her skill at fine detail. Frida Kahlo, Self-Portrait with Thorn Necklace and Hummingbird, Nickolas Muray Collection, Harry Ransom Center, University of Texas at Austin[9] Caterina van Hemessen's 1548 self-portrait, perhaps the oldest self-portrait of a female oil-painter, though much earlier examples of manuscript painters exist. Sofonisba Anguissola (c. 1532–1625) of Cremona served as court painter to the Queen of Spain, and painted several self-portraits and many images of her family. c.1556 Lavinia Fontana, Self-portrait at the Clavichord with a Servant, 1577. She was born in Bologna, the daughter of Prospero Fontana, who was a painter of the School of Bologna. Artemisia Gentileschi, Self-Portrait as the Allegory of Painting, 1630s, Royal Collection. Note the pulled-up sleeve on the arm holding the brush. Judith Leyster, a painter of genre subjects. NGA, 1630. Dutch Golden Age painter. The number of surviving works attributed to her varies between fewer than 20 and about 35. Mary Beale, Self-portrait, c. 1675–1680, She became one of the most important portrait painters of 17th-century England, and has been described as the first professional female English painter. Angelica Kauffman, self-portrait, 1780–1785, a successful painter in her time, she was a great friend of Sir Joshua Reynolds. Adélaïde Labille-Guiard, 1785, with two pupils. A "subjects-eye" view of the painter at work. It seems likely that women society portraitists did actually paint wearing fashionable clothes like this. Élisabeth Vigée-Lebrun painted several self-portraits that were hugely successful in the Paris Salons, and was influential in pioneering an "informal" fashion style at the end of the Ancien Régime. At 22, 1782.[10] Marie-Denise Villers, Young Woman Drawing, 1801, thought to be her self-portrait, and her most famous and finest painting. Originally attributed to Jacques-Louis David.[11] Marie Ellenrieder, self portrait, 1819. A German religious artist and the first woman to enter the Academy of Munich. Mary Cassatt was an American portrait painter who specialized in portraits of women and children, 1878. Marie Bashkirtseff self-portrait, 1880 was a Russian born artist who died at twenty-five. A large number of Bashkirtseff's works were destroyed by the Nazis during World War II. Gwen John (1902) also mostly painted women and children. Paula Modersohn-Becker (1906), was a German painter and one of the most important representatives of early expressionism. Zinaida Serebriakova, At the Dressing-Table (1909), was among the first female Russian painters of distinction. Antiquity[edit] Images of artists at work are encountered in Ancient Egyptian painting, and sculpture[12] and also on Ancient Greek vases. One of the first self-portraits was made by the Pharaoh Akhenaten's chief sculptor Bak in 1365 BC. Plutarch mentions that the Ancient Greek sculptor Phidias had included a likeness of himself in a number of characters in the "Battle of the Amazons" on the Parthenon, and there are classical references to painted self-portraits, none of which have survived. Asia[edit] Portraits and self-portraits have a longer continuous history in Asian art than in Europe. Many in the scholar gentleman tradition are quite small, depicting the artist in a large landscape, illustrating a poem in calligraphy on his experience of the scene. Another tradition, associated with Zen Buddhism, produced lively semi-caricatured self-portraits, whilst others remain closer to the conventions of the formal portrait. Miyamoto Musashi, Samurai, writer and artist, c. 1640. Hakuin Ekaku was a Zen monk, who painted many self-portraits of himself as sages of the past, 1764, Tokyo. Motoori Norinaga, late 18th century, Japan Hokusai, early 19th century, Japan Another Hokusai, Louvre Kikuchi Yōsai, 1856-7, Japan. Chen Hongshou, China, 1635 Ren Xiong, a member of the Shanghai school, c.1850 European art[edit] Joseph Wright of Derby Self-portrait (1765-1768) Illuminated manuscripts contain a number of apparent self-portraits, notably those of Saint Dunstan and Matthew Paris. Most of these either show the artist at work, or presenting the finished book to either a donor or a sacred figure, or venerating such a figure.[13] Orcagna is believed to have painted himself as a figure in a fresco of 1359,[citation needed] which became, at least according to art historians — Vasari records a number of such traditions — a common practice of artists.[citation needed] However, for earlier artists, with no other portrait to compare to, these descriptions are necessarily rather speculative. Among the earliest self-portraits are also two frescos by Johannes Aquila, one in Velemér (1378), western Hungary, and one in Martjanci (1392), northeastern Slovenia.[14] In Italy Giotto di Bondone (1267–1337) included himself in the cycle of "eminent men" in the Castle of Naples, Masaccio (1401–1428) depicted himself as one of the apostles in the painting of the Brancacci Chapel, and Benozzo Gozzoli includes himself, with other portraits, in the Palazzo Medici Procession of the Magi (1459), with his name written on his hat. This is imitated a few years later by Sandro Botticelli, as a spectator of the Adoration of the Magi (1475), who turns from the scene to look at us. Fourteenth-century sculpted portrait busts of and by the Parler family in Prague Cathedral include self-portraits, and are among the earliest such busts of non-royal figures. Ghiberti included a small head of himself in his most famous work. Notably, the earliest self-portrait painted in England, other than in a manuscript, is the miniature painted in oils on panel by the German artist Gerlach Flicke, 1554. Saint Dunstan, then artist-Abbot of Glastonbury, prostrates himself before a giant Christ. Later he became Archbishop of Canterbury. c. 950 (cropped at bottom). Peter Parler, late fourteenth century, from Prague Cathedral, where he was master architect and sculptor. Lorenzo Ghiberti on the Gates of Paradise, Baptisterio, Florence self portrait, early 15th century Jan van Eyck, Portrait of a Man in a Turban (actually a chaperon), 1433, National Gallery, generally regarded as a self-portrait, which would make it the earliest Western panel portrait after antiquity. Rogier van der Weyden, as Saint Luke, makes a drawing for his painting of the Virgin. Boston, c. 1440. Jean Fouquet, c. 1450, a very early portrait miniature, and if the Van Eyck above is excluded, the oldest individual Western painted self-portrait. Andrea Mantegna, c. 1474, includes himself (as himself) in his appropriate place in this fresco of the Gonzaga court. Israhel van Meckenem and his wife, engraving c. 1490, the earliest portrait print. Albrecht Dürer, 1471–1528, the first prolific self-portraitist[edit] Albrecht Dürer was an artist highly conscious of his public image and reputation, whose main income came from his old master prints, all containing his famous monogram, which were sold throughout Europe. He probably depicted himself more often than any artist before him, producing at least twelve images, including three oil portraits, and figures in four altarpieces. The earliest is a silverpoint drawing created when he was thirteen years old. At twenty-two Dürer painted the Self-portrait with Carnation (1493, Louvre), probably to send to his new fiancée. The Madrid self-portrait (1498, Prado) depicts Dürer as a dandy in fashionable Italian dress, reflecting the international success he had achieved by then. In his last self-portrait, sold or given to the city of Nuremberg, and displayed publicly, which very few portraits then were, the artist depicted himself with an unmistakable resemblance to Jesus Christ (Munich, Alte Pinakothek). He later re-used the face in a religious engraving of, revealingly, the Veil of Veronica, Christ's own "self-portrait" (B.25). A self-portrait in gouache he sent to Raphael has not survived. A woodcut of a bathhouse and a drawing show virtually nude self-portraits.[15] Dürer at thirteen, silverpoint, Albertina, 1484 Dürer at about twenty, 1491–92, drawing, Metropolitan Albrecht Dürer Self-portrait 1493. oil, originally on vellum Louvre, Paris. This is among the earliest known formal self-portraits. He is dressed in Italian fashion, reflecting his international success. Dürer's last self-portrait, 1500—unmistakably Christ-like Renaissance and Baroque[edit] The great Italian painters of the Renaissance made comparatively few formal painted self-portraits, but often included themselves in larger works. Most individual self-portraits they have left were straightforward depictions; Dürer's showmanship was rarely followed, although a controversially attributed Self-portrait as David by Giorgione would have something of the same spirit, if it is a self-portrait. There is a portrait by Pietro Perugino of about 1500 (Collegio del Cambio of Perugia), and one by the young Parmigianino showing the view in a convex mirror. There is also a drawing by Leonardo da Vinci (1512),[16] and self-portraits in larger works by Michelangelo, who gave his face to the skin of St. Bartholomew in the Last Judgement of the Sistine Chapel (1536–1541), and Raphael who is seen in the characters of School of Athens 1510, or with a friend who holds his shoulder (1518). Also notable are two portraits of Titian as an old man in the 1560s. Paolo Veronese appears as a violinist clothed in white in his Marriage at Cana, accompanied by Titian on the bass viol (1562). Northern artists continued to make more individual portraits, often looking very much like their other bourgeois sitters. Johan Gregor van der Schardt produced a painted terracotta bust of himself (c.1573).[17] Titian's Allegory of Prudence (c. 1565–70) is thought to depict Titian, his son Orazio, and a young cousin, Marco Vecellio.[18] Titian also painted a late self-portrait in 1567; apparently his first. Baroque artist Artemisia Gentileschi's La Pittura (Self-portrait as the allegory of painting) presents herself embodying the classical allegorical representation of Painting, seen in the dramatic mask worn around Gentileschi's neck which Painting often carries. The artist's focus on her work, away from the viewer, highlights the drama of the Baroque period, and the changing role of the artist from craftsperson to singular innovator.[19] Caravaggio painted himself in Bacchus at the beginning of his career, then appears in the staffage of some of his larger paintings. Finally, the head of Goliath held by David (1605–10, Galleria Borghese) is Caravaggio's own. Gentile Bellini, black chalk, 1496 or earlier, Berlin Nuremberg sculptor Adam Kraft, self-portrait from St Lorenz Church, 1490s. Probable self-portrait by Leonardo da Vinci, c. 1512–1515 Nicholas Hilliard, self-portrait miniature, 1577 Rembrandt and the 17th century in Northern Europe[edit] In the 17th century, Flemish and Dutch artists painted themselves far more often; by this date most successful artists had a position in society where a member of any trade would consider having their portrait painted. Many also include their families, again following the normal practice for the middle-classes. Mary Beale, Anthony van Dyck and Peter Paul Rubens gave us numerous images of themselves, the latter also often painting his family. This practice was especially common for women artists, whose inclusion of their families was often a deliberate attempt to mitigate criticism of their profession causing distraction from their "natural role" as mothers.[19] Rembrandt was the most frequent self-portraitist, at least until the self-obsessed modern period, also often painting his wife, son and mistress. At one time about ninety paintings were counted as Rembrandt self-portraits, but it is now known that he had his students copy his own self-portraits as part of their training. Modern scholarship has reduced the autograph count to something over forty paintings, as well as a few drawings and thirty-one etchings, which include many of the most remarkable images of the group. Many show him posing in quasi-historical fancy dress, or pulling faces at himself. His oil paintings trace the progress from an uncertain young man to the dapper and very successful portrait-painter of the 1630s to the troubled but massively powerful portraits of his old age.[20] A young Rembrandt, c. 1628, when he was 22. Partly an exercise in chiaroscuro. Rijksmuseum Etching, c. 1630. Probably an exercise in capturing facial expressions for larger paintings. Rembrandt in 1632, when he was enjoying great success as a fashionable portraitist in this style. Role-playing in Self-portrait as an oriental Potentate with a Kris, etching, 1634. 1640, wearing a costume in the style of over a century earlier. National Gallery Vienna c. 1655, oil on walnut, cut down in size. Again in antique costume, 1658, Oil on canvas Frick Collection. His largest self-portrait, for which a new mirror may have been used. Dated 1669, the year he died, though he looks much older in other portraits. National Gallery, London After Rembrandt[edit] Self-Portrait of Van Gogh with head bandaged, after he (debatedly) cut off part of his ear. In Spain, there were self-portraits of Bartolomé Estéban Murillo and Diego Velázquez. Francisco de Zurbarán represented himself in Luke the Evangelist at the feet of Christ on the cross (around 1635). In the 19th century, Goya painted himself numerous times. French self-portraits, at least after Nicolas Poussin tend to show the social status of the artist, although Jean-Baptiste-Siméon Chardin and some other instead showed their real working costume very realistically. This was a decision all 18th-century self-portraitists needed to make, although many painted themselves in both formal and informal costume in different paintings. Thereafter, one can say that most significant painters left us at least one self-portrait, even after the decline of the painted portrait with the arrival of photography. Gustave Courbet (see below) was perhaps the most creative self-portraitist of the 19th century, and The Artist's studio and Bonjour, Monsieur Courbet are perhaps the largest self-portraits ever painted. Both contain many figures, but are firmly centred on the heroic figure of the artist. Prolific modern self-portraitists[edit] Vincent van Gogh, Self Portrait, dedicated to Gauguin, 1888 One of the most famous and most prolific of self-portraitists was Vincent van Gogh, who drew and painted himself more than 43 times between 1886 and 1889.[21][22] In all of these self-portraits one is struck that the gaze of the painter is seldom directed at us; even when it is a fixed gaze, he seems to look elsewhere. These paintings vary in intensity and color and some portray the artist with bandages; representing the episode in which he severed one of his ears.[23] The many self-portraits of Egon Schiele set new standards of openness, or perhaps exhibitionism, representing him naked in many positions, sometimes masturbating or with an erection, as in Eros (1911). Stanley Spencer was to follow somewhat in this vein. Max Beckmann was a prolific painter of self-portraits [24] as was Edvard Munch who made great numbers of self-portrait paintings (70), prints (20) and drawings or watercolours (over 100) throughout his life, many showing him being badly treated by life, and especially by women.[25] Obsessively using the self-portrait as a personal and introspective artistic expression was Horst Janssen, who produced hundreds of self-portraits depicting him a wide range of contexts most notably in relation to sickness, moodyness and death.[26] The 2004 exhibition "Schiele, Janssen. Selbstinszenierung, Eros, Tod" (Schiele, Janssen: Self-dramatisation, Eros, Death) at the Leopold Museum in Vienna paralleled the works of Egon Schiele and Horst Janssen, both heavily drawing on sujets of erotica and death in combination with relentless self-portraiture.[27] Frida Kahlo, who following a terrible accident spent many years bedridden, with only herself for a model, was another painter whose self-portraits depict great pain, in her case physical as well as mental. Her 55-odd self-portraits include many of herself from the waist up, and also some nightmarish representations which symbolize her physical sufferings.[28][29] Throughout his long career, Pablo Picasso often used self-portraits to depict himself in the many different guises, disguises and incarnations of his autobiographical artistic persona. From the young unknown "Yo Picasso" period to the "Minotaur in the Labyrinth" period, to the "old Cavalier" and the "lecherous old artist and model" periods. Often Picasso's self-portraits depicted and revealed complicated psychological insights, both personal and profound about the inner state and well being of the artist. Another artist who painted interestingly personal and revealing self-portraits throughout his career was Pierre Bonnard. Bonnard also painted dozens of portraits of his wife Marthe throughout her life as well. Vincent van Gogh, Paul Gauguin, Egon Schiele and Horst Janssen in particular made intense (at times disturbingly so) and self-revealing self-portraits throughout their careers. Self-portraits in general[edit] Gallery: painters at work[edit] Gustave Courbet, The Painter's Studio: A Real Allegory of a Seven Year Phase in my Artistic (and Moral) Life, 1855, Louvre Rembrandt, The Artist in his Studio, 1628, Museum of Fine Arts, Boston Many of the medieval portraits show the artist at work, and Jan van Eyck (above) his chaperon hat has the parts normally hanging loose tied up on his head, giving the misleading impression he is wearing a turban, presumably for convenience whilst he paints.[30] In the early modern period, increasingly, men as well as women who painted themselves at work had to choose whether to present themselves in their best clothes, and best room, or to depict studio practice realistically. See also the Gallery of Women painters above. Pieter Brueghel the Elder, The Painter and The Buyer, c.1565, pen and ink on brown paper, presumed to be a self-portrait. Antwerp Pierre Mignard, 1690, Louvre. Francesco Solimena, c. 1715. François Boucher, self-portrait in the studio, 1720 Joshua Reynolds, National Portrait Gallery, 1748. The artist as visionary. Much cut down, this originally had a vertical format. George Desmarées and his daughter, 1750, Munich. Jean-Honoré Fragonard, Self-Portrait with Palette and Brushes, 1769 Jean-Baptiste-Siméon Chardin (1771), in his painting clothes. Goya, Self-portrait in the Studio, 1795 Carl Ludwig Jessen, Self-portrait, 1857 Vincent van Gogh, Self-Portrait as a Painter, December 1887 - February 1888 Henri Rousseau, 1890 Jacek Malczewski, Self-portrait with a Palette, 1892 Julian Fałat, Self-portrait with a Palette, 1896 Anders Zorn, Self-portrait with a Model, 1896 Umberto Boccioni, Self-portrait, 1906 Enrique Simonet, Self-portrait with a Palette, 1910 Ilya Repin, Self-portrait at Work, 1915 Henri Matisse, Self-portrait, 1918, Matisse Museum (Le Cateau) Sergio de Castro,Self-portrait with brushes, oil on canvas, 1961 Classification[edit] Art critic Galina Vasilyeva-Shlyapina separates two basic forms of the self-portrait: "professional" portraits, in which the artist is depicted at work, and "personal" portraits, which reveal moral and psychological features. She also proposes a more detailed taxonomy: (1) the "insertable" self-portrait, where the artist inserts his or her own portrait into, for example, a group of characters related to some subject; (2) the "prestigious, or symbolic" self-portrait, where an artist depicts him- or herself in the guise of a historical person or religious hero; (3) the "group portrait" where artist is depicted with members of family or other real persons; (4) the "separate or natural" self-portrait, where the artist is depicted alone. However it might be thought these classes are rather rigid; many portraits manage to combine several of them.[31] With new media came a chance to create different kinds of self-portraits besides simply static painting or photographs. Many people, especially teens, use social networking sites to form their own personal identity on the internet.[32] Still others use blogs or create personal web pages to create a space for self-expression and self-portraiture. Mirrors and poses[edit] Las Meninas, painted in 1656, shows Diego Velázquez working at the easel to the left. The self-portrait supposes in theory the use of a mirror; glass mirrors became available in Europe in the 15th century. The first mirrors used were convex, introducing deformations that the artist sometimes preserved. A painting by Parmigianino in 1524 Self-portrait in a mirror, demonstrates the phenomenon. Mirrors permit surprising compositions like the Triple self-portrait by Johannes Gumpp (1646), or more recently that of Salvador Dalí shown from the back painting his wife, Gala (1972–73). This use of the mirror often results in right-handed painters representing themselves as left-handed (and vice versa). Usually the face painted is therefore a mirror image of that the rest of the world saw, unless two mirrors were used. Most of Rembrandt's self-portraits before 1660 show only one hand – the painting hand is left unpainted.[33] He appears to have bought a larger mirror in about 1652, after which his self-portraits become larger. In 1658 a large mirror in a wood frame broke whilst being transported to his house; nonetheless, in this year he completed his Frick self-portrait, his largest. Parmigianino, Self-portrait in a mirror c. 1524, is itself painted on a convex surface, like that of the mirrors of the period Johannes Gumpp, 1646, shows how most self-portraits were painted[34] Gustave Courbet, The Artist's Studio (L'Atelier du peintre): A Real Allegory of a Seven Year Phase in my Artistic and Moral Life, 1855, Musée d'Orsay The size of single-sheet mirrors was restricted until technical advances made in France in 1688 by Bernard Perrot. They also remained very fragile, and large ones were much more expensive pro-rata than small ones – the breakages were recut into small pieces. About 80 cm, or two and a half feet, seems to have been the maximum size until then – roughly the size of the palace mirror in Las Meninas (the convex mirror in the Arnolfini Portrait is considered by historians impractically large, one of Van Eyck's many cunning distortions of scale).[35] Largely for this reason, most early self-portraits show painters at no more than half-length. Self-portraits of the artist at work were, as mentioned above, the commonest form of medieval self-portrait, and these have continued to be popular, with a specially large number from the 18th century on. One particular type in the medieval and Renaissance periods was the artist shown as Saint Luke (patron saint of artists) painting the Virgin Mary. Many of these were presented to the local Guild of Saint Luke, to be placed in their chapel. A famous large view of the artist in his studio is The Artist's Studio by Gustave Courbet (1855), an immense "Allegory" of objects and characters amid which the painter sits. Gallery: mortality in the self-portrait[edit] Michelangelo Buonarroti, c. 1535–1541, Sistine Chapel: The Last Judgment, Michelangelo as a limp skin hanging from the hand of St. Bartholomew. Allegory of Prudence, Titian, his son and the cousin he had virtually adopted, as Past, Present and Future. National Gallery, London, late 1560s. Sofonisba Anguissola, Self-portrait, 1610, aged 78, the last of her many self-portraits, though she was painted later by Van Dyck. Goliath in this late Caravaggio David with the head of Goliath is a self-portrait. 1605–10, Galleria Borghese, Rome. Jan de Bray (left) and his family pose as The Banquet of Anthony and Cleopatra. By the date of this second version of 1669, most of the models had died of the plague some years before. Goya at the age of 74, Self-portrait with Doctor Arrieta, 1820, Minneapolis. Lovis Corinth, 1896. Flesh and bone, life and death are contrasted here. Other meanings, storytelling[edit] Self-portrait as David with the head of Goliath, Johan Zoffany The self-portraits of many Contemporary artists and Modernists often are characterized by a strong sense of narrative, often but not strictly limited to vignettes from the artists life-story. Sometimes the narrative resembles fantasy, roleplaying and fiction. Besides Diego Velázquez, (in his painting Las Meninas), Rembrandt Van Rijn, Jan de Bray, Gustave Courbet, Vincent van Gogh, and Paul Gauguin other artists whose self-portraits reveal complex narratives include Pierre Bonnard, Marc Chagall, Lucian Freud, Arshile Gorky, Alice Neel, Pablo Picasso, Lucas Samaras, Jenny Saville, Cindy Sherman, Andy Warhol and Gilbert and George. Cristofano Allori, Judith with the Head of Holofernes, 1613. According to his biographer, the heads were those of the painter, his ex-lover, and her mother. Compare Caravaggio above.[36] Van Dyck with sunflower, representing his patronage by Charles I, whose medal he holds up to the flower. Or is Van Dyck the sun the flower turns to?[37] 1633 or later. Johann Zoffany specialised in group portraits, often "conversation pieces" with gentle narrative content, and spent some years in India. c. 1786. Gustave Courbet, 1854, Bonjour, Monsieur Courbet. The artist has travelled to the South of France (in the vanishing coach), to meet the collector Alfred Bruyas, for whom this was painted.[38] Self-promotion[edit] The self-portrait can be a very effective form of advertising for an artist, especially of course for a portrait painter. Dürer was not really interested in portraits commercially, but made good use of his extraordinary self-portraits to advertise himself as an artist, something he was very sophisticated in doing. Sofonisba Anguissola painted intricate miniatures which served as advertisements for her skill as well as novelty items, considered such because the rarity of successful women painters provided them with an oddity quality.[39] Rembrandt made his living principally from portrait-painting during his most successful period, and like Van Dyck and Joshua Reynolds, many of his portraits were certainly intended to advertise his skills. With the advent of regular Academy shows, many artists tried to produce memorable self-portraits to make an impression on the artistic stage. A recent exhibition at the National Gallery, London, Rebels and Martyrs, did not shrink from the comic bathos that sometimes resulted.[40] An example from the 21st century is Arnaud Prinstet, an otherwise little-known contemporary artist who has generated good amounts of publicity by undertaking to paint his self-portrait every day.[41] On the other hand, some artists depicted themselves very much as they did other clients. François Desportes, a specialist animal painter, Self-portrait as Hunter, 1699. Maurice Quentin de La Tour, pastel, 1750–60. Gustave Courbet, Self Portrait (The Desperate Man), c. 1843. William Orpen, c. 1910 Diagnosing the self-portrait[edit] Self-portrait of Egon Schiele 1911, depicting masturbation. Some artists who suffered neurological or physical diseases have left self-portraits of themselves that have allowed later physicians to attempt to analyze disruptions of mental processes; and many of these analyses have entered into the textbooks of neurology.[2] The self-portraits of artists who suffered mental illnesses give a unique possibility to physicians for investigating self-perception in people with psychological, psychiatric or neurologic disturbances. Russian sexologist Igor Kon in his article about masturbation notes that a habit of masturbating may be depicted in works of art, particularly paintings. So Austrian artist Egon Schiele depicted himself so occupied in one of his self-portraits. Kon observes that this painting does not portray pleasure from the masturbation, but a feeling of solitude. Creations of Schiele are analyzed by other researchers in terms of sexuality, and particularly pedophilia. Collections[edit] One of the most distinguished, and oldest, collections of self-portraits is in the Vasari Corridor of the Uffizi Gallery in Florence. It was originally the collection by the Cardinal Leopoldo de' Medici in the second part of the 17th century and has been maintained and expanded until the present time. It is mostly not on view for general visitors, although some paintings are shown in the main galleries. Many famous artists have not been able to resist an invitation to donate a self-portrait to the collection. It comprises more than 200 portraits, in particular those of Pietro da Cortona, Charles Le Brun, Jean-Baptiste-Camille Corot, and Marc Chagall. Other important collections are housed at the National Portrait Gallery (United Kingdom) in London (with various satellite outstations elsewhere), and the National Portrait Gallery in Washington, D.C.. Gallery[edit] Pietro Perugino, c.1500 Hans Baldung, 1526 Titian seems to have painted no self-portraits until he was in old age, 1567 Probable self-portrait by El Greco, 1604 Peter Paul Rubens, 1623 Rubens with his (first) wife Isabella Brant, Munich, c.1609 Self-portrait of Francisco Zurbarán, as Saint Luke. Detail of Saint Luke as a Painter Before the Crucifixion Salvator Rosa, 1640. "Of Silence and Speech, Silence is better" says the inscription Diego Velázquez, Self-Portrait, 1643 Nicolas Poussin, Self-Portrait, 1650 Joshua Reynolds, presented to the Royal Academy, of which he was first President. Rather like Rembrandt, but more successful. 1773 Gilbert Stuart, Self-portrait, 1778 Francisco Goya, 1815 Oil on panel, Museo de la Real Academia de San Fernando, Madrid Eugène Delacroix, 1837 Gustave Courbet, 1842 Karl Bryullov, 1848 Edgar Degas, Self-portrait, 1855 Henri Fantin-Latour, Self-portrait, 1859 Ivan Kramskoi, Self-portrait, 1867 James McNeill Whistler, Self-portrait, 1872 Édouard Manet, Self-Portrait with Palette, 1879 Paul Cézanne, 1880–1881 National Gallery, London Henri de Toulouse-Lautrec, Self portrait, 1882–1883 Valentin Serov, 1887 Édouard Vuillard, Self-portrait, 1889 Vincent van Gogh, 1889 Musée d'Orsay Paris Paul Gauguin, 1893 Thomas Eakins, Self-portrait, 1902 Henri Rousseau, 1903, Self-portrait of the Artist with a Lamp Henri Matisse, Self-Portrait in a Striped T-shirt, 1906, Statens Museum for Kunst, Copenhagen, Denmark Pierre-Auguste Renoir, 1910 Egon Schiele, 1912 Photo-portraits[edit] See also: Francesca Woodman, Cindy Sherman, George Chakravarthi, selfie, and space selfie Two methods of obtaining photographic self-portraits are widespread. One is photographing a reflection in the mirror, and the other photographing one's self with the camera in an outstretched hand. Eleazar Langman photographed his reflection on the surface of a nickel-plated teapot. Another method involves setting the camera or capture device upon a tripod, or surface. One might then set the camera's timer, or use a remote controlled shutter release. Finally, setting up the camera, entering the scene and having an assistant release the shutter (i.e., if the presence of a cable release is unwanted in the photo) can arguably be regarded as a photographic self-portrait, as well. The speed of creating photographic self-portraits allowed for a range of images with more of a "play" atmosphere than traditional methods. One such example is Frances Benjamin Johnson's Self-Portrait, c. 1896, an image which demonstrates the photo-portrait's ability to play with gender roles.[19] The first photographic portrait ever made was a self-portrait by Robert Cornelius, 1839. Mathew Brady, self-portrait, circa 1875 Nadar, Revolving Self Portrait, c. 1865 Arthur Rimbaud, Self-portrait in Harar, Ethiopia, 1883[42] Thomas Eakins, Self-portrait with John Laurie Wallace, circa 1883 Eadweard Muybridge Self-portrait as man throwing, climbing and walking, circa 1893 Edgar Degas, Self-portrait, 1895 Edward S. Curtis, self-portrait, 1898 Émile Zola, self-portrait, 1902 Edvard Munch, self-portrait at the beach in Warnemünde, 1907. 83 × 87 mm. Munch Museum, Oslo Sergey Prokudin-Gorsky, Self-portrait on the Korolistskali River, 1912 Ernst Kirchner, self-portrait, 1919 Drawings, prints and engravings[edit] Leonardo da Vinci, Self-portrait, c. 1512 to 1515. Giuseppe Arcimboldo, self portrait, c. 1577 Rembrandt van Rijn, Self-portrait, pen and brush and ink on paper, c. 1628-1629 Peter Paul Rubens, self portrait, c. 1634 Francisco de Goya, self portrait, print, 1795 John Constable self portrait, 1806 Caspar David Friedrich, self portrait, age thirty-six, 1810 Mikhail Vrubel, self portrait, c. 1885 See also[edit] Hockney–Falco thesis Portrait Portrait of a Young Man with a Golden Chain Portrait painting Self-portraits by Rembrandt Self-portraits by Vincent van Gogh The Portrait Now Notes and references[edit] ^ Campbell, Lorne (1998). The Fifteenth Century Netherlandish Paintings. National Gallery Catalogues (new series). pp. 212–17. ISBN 1-85709-171-X.  ^ a b accessed online July 28, 2007 an online history of self-portraits, various excerpts from Edward Lucie-Smith and Sean Kelly, The Self Portrait: A Modern View (London: Sarema Press, 1987) ^ Campbell, Lorne, Renaissance Portraits, European Portrait-Painting in the 14th, 15th and 16th Centuries, pp. 3-4, 1990, Yale, ISBN 0-300-04675-8 ^ "Web Gallery of Art: Rubens, Pieter Pauwel – The Four Philosophers, 1611–12". 2010. Retrieved 2010-08-08.  ^ Campbell, Lorne; National Gallery Catalogues (new series): The Fifteenth Century Netherlandish Paintings, pp 180, 1998, ISBN 1-85709-171-X, OL392219M, OCLC 40732051, LCCN 98-66510, (also titled The Fifteenth Century Netherlandish Schools). The Arnolfini Portrait hung in the same palace in Madrid in which Las Meninas was painted ^ "Albrecht Dürer and his Legacy: The graphic work of a Renaissance artist". Studio International Magazine. March 2003. Retrieved 2010-08-08.  ^ Full composition (part of larger scheme) ^ Full composition (part of larger scheme) ^ Image—full description and credit: Frida Kahlo, Self-Portrait with Thorn Necklace and Hummingbird, 1940, oil on canvas on Masonite, 24½ × 19 inches, Nikolas Muray Collection, Harry Ransom Center, The University of Texas at Austin, 2007. Banco de México Diego Rivera & Frida Kahlo Museums Trust, Av. Cinco de Mayo No. 2, Col. Centro, Del. Cuauhtémoc 06059, México, D.F. ^ This is a later and larger repetition in the National Gallery of the original ^ Marie-Denise Villers at the Metropolitan Museum of Art ^ Pharaoh's sculptor, Bak accessed online August 20, 2011 ^ Jonathon Alexander; Medieval Illuminators and their Methods of Work; p.8-34, Yale UP, 1992, ISBN 0-300-05689-3 collects several examples ^ Hourihane, Colum (2012). "Johannes Aquila de Rakerspurga". The Grove Encyclopedia of Medieval Art and Architecture. Oxford University Press. p. 527. ISBN 978-0-19-539536-5.  ^ For all this section, Giulia Bartrum, Albrecht Dürer and his Legacy, p. 77–84 & passim, British Museum Press, 2002, ISBN 0-7141-2633-0 ^ This drawing in red chalk is widely (though not universally) accepted as an original self-portrait. The main reason for hesitation in accepting it as a portrait of Leonardo is that the subject is apparently of a greater age than Leonardo ever achieved. But it is possible that he drew this picture of himself deliberately aged, specifically for Raphael's portrait of him in the School of Athens. A case has also been made, originally by novelist Dmitry Merezhkovsky, that Leonardo based his famous picture Mona Lisa on his own self-portrait. ^ Scholten, Frits (2007/8). "Johan Gregor van der Schardt and the Moment of Self-Portraiture in Sculpture". Simiolus: Netherlands Quarterly for the History of Art 33 (4): 195–220. Retrieved 2012-12-06.  Check date values in: |date= (help) ^ Erwin Panofsky (and originally Fritz Saxl), Titian's "Allegory of Prudence", A Postscript, in Meaning in the Visual Arts, Doubleday/Penguin, 1955 ^ a b c Frances Borzello, Seeing Ourselves: Women's Self-Portraiture, 1998. ^ For this section and the gallery, Ernst van de Wetering in Rembrandt by himself, p.10 and passim, 1999, National Gallery, London/Mauritshuis, The Hague, ISBN 1-85709-270-8 ^ Musee D'Orsay ^ Encyclopedia of Irish and World Art, art of self-portrait Retrieved June 13, 2010 ^ Andrea Bassil, Lives of the Artists, Vincent van Gogh pp.36-37 Retrieved June 13, 2010 ^ Max Beckmann, The Self Portraits Retrieved October 16, 2011 ^ Munch Museum ^ [1] ^ [2] ^ Amazing women Frida Kahlo, I am not sick. I am broken. But I am happy as long as I can paint. Retrieved September 28, 2010 ^ National Museum of Women Artists Retrieved September 28, 2010 ^ Campbell, Lorne; National Gallery Catalogues (new series): The Fifteenth Century Netherlandish Paintings, pp 214, 1998, ISBN 1-85709-171-X, OL392219M, OCLC 40732051, LCCN 98-66510, (also titled The Fifteenth Century Netherlandish Schools) ^ Respectively, the "вставной","представительский, или символический", "групповой портрет", "отдельный или естественный" ^ danah boyd. "Why Youth (Heart) Social Networking Sites: The Role of Networked Publics in Teenage Social Life." MacArthur Foundation Series on Digital Learning, Identity Volume. ed. David Buckingham. ^ Rembrandt by himself, op cit, p.211 ^ A better-known version is in the Uffizi. This one was sold at auction in Germany in 2007 ^ Rembrandt by himself, op cit, pp 11-13; for the Arnolfini reference see: National Gallery Catalogues (new series): The Fifteenth Century Netherlandish Paintings, Lorne Campbell, 1998, ISBN 1-85709-171-X, OL392219M, OCLC 40732051, LCCN 98-66510, (also titled The Fifteenth Century Netherlandish Schools) ^ Aislinn Loconte in, Lucy Whitaker, Martin Clayton, The Art of Italy in the Royal Collection; Renaissance and Baroque, p.270, Royal Collection Publications, 2007, ISBN 978-1-902163-29-1. The biographer was Baldinucci. This is the version in the Royal Collection, there are others in the Pitti Palace etc. ^ asks Michael Levey in Painting at Court, Weidenfeld and Nicholson, London, 1971, pp 124-5 ^ Virginia MFA ^ Griselda Pollack ^ Rebels and Martyrs, National Gallery ^ Ses hits ^ Jeancolas (1998), 164. Further reading[edit] John J. Ciofalo, Self-Portraits of Francisco Goya. Cambridge University Press, 2001 Edward Lucie-Smith with Sean Kelly, The Self Portrait: A Modern View. (1987) Ernst van de Wetering and others; Rembrandt by himself, 1999, National Gallery, London / Mauritshuis, The Hague, ISBN 1-85709-270-8 Joseph Leo Koerner, The Moment of Self-Portraiture in German Renaissance Art, Chicago/London, 1993 Jonathan Miller, On Reflection, 1998, National Gallery, ISBN 1-85709-237-6. Joanna Woodall, Self Portrait. Renaissance to Contemporary. National Portrait Gallery, London and Art Gallery of New South Wales, Sydney, 2005. Belle, Julian (Ed.): Five Hundred Self-Portraits. Phaidon Press, London/New York, 2000 (pb 2004), ISBN 0-7148-4384-9 Self-Portraits in chronological order from ancient Egypt to the present. Not in English[edit] Joëlle Moulin, L'autoportrait au XXe siècle, éd. Adam Biro, Paris, 1999 Pascal Bonafoux, Les peintres et l'autoportrait, 1984 Bernard Auriol, L'image préalable, l'expression impressive et l'autoportrait, Psychologie Médicale, 19, 9, 1543–1547, 1987 {available on line : self-portrait} Bonafoux, Pascal / Rosenberg, David: Moi! Autoportraits du XXe siècle. Musée du Luxembourg (Paris) / Skira Editore (Milano), Exhibition catalogue. 2004, Text French, Paris 2004, ISBN 88-8491-854-5 The book presents 155 artist (fine art) of the 20th century by showing their self-portraits added by informative texts. Borzello, Frances: Wie Frauen sich sehen  –  Selbstbildnisse aus fünf Jahrhunderten. Karl Blessing Verlag, München 1998, ISBN 3-89667-052-2 Calabrese, Omar: Die Geschichte des Selbstporträts. Deutscher Kunstverlag, München 2006, ISBN 3-7774-2955-4 Pfisterer, Ulrich / Rosen, Valeska von ~ (Hrsg.): Der Künstler als Kunstwerk. Selbstporträts vom Mittelalter bis zur Gegenwart. Reclam, Stuttgart 2005, ISBN 3-15-010571-4 (Rezension) Jeancolas, Claude. (1998). Passion Rimbaud: L'Album d'une vie. (French) Paris: Textuel. ISBN 978-2-909317-66-3 Kathrin Schmidt: Annegret Soltau: ich selbst, Mathildenhöhe Darmstadt (Germany), 2006 ISBN 3-935062-06-0 Self-portrait in neurology[edit] Tielsch AH, Allen PJ (2005) Listen to them draw: screening children in primary care through the use of human figure drawings. Pediatr Nurs 31(4): 320–327. This survey of literature is focused on the method of drawing people as the method of diagnostics. Children's figures can recognize mental disorders. The authors describe the use of self-portraits for diagnostics of emotional disorders in children from 6 to 12 years. Although this procedure does not make it possible to place final diagnosis, it is useful for the recognition of problems. Morin C, Pradat-Diehl P, Robain G, Bensalah Y, Perrigot M (2003) Stroke hemiplegia and specular image: lessons from self-portraits. Int J Aging Hum Dev 56(1): 1-41. Patients with hemiplegia have diverse problems of self-perception, which are caused by neurological defeats of the idea of body, or by psychological problems with the perception their own self. Psychology of self-perception[edit] Wegner DM (2003) The mind's self-portrait. Ann N Y Acad Sci 1001: 212–225. Psychology and neuroscience approach understanding of reason and consciousness. Meanwhile, each human reason contains the self-portrait, which contains the self-appraisal of cognitive processes. This self-portrait assumes that the actions of man are governed by thoughts and, thus, the body is governed by consciousness. Self-portrait leads to the persuasion, that we consciously desire to make something. Studies show that self-portraiture is a caricature on the function of the brain, but at the same time it is the basis of the sensation of authorship and responsibility of one's own actions. External links[edit] Wikimedia Commons has media related to self-portraits. National Portrait Gallery – Official web site "The Exploration of Self: What Artists Find When They Search in the Mirror" by Jeanne Ivy. UMBC, research related to The Self Portrait: A Modern View. (1987), Edward Lucie-Smith with Sean Kelly and other books One can also use the term "autoportrait" in the search engine of the Joconde database, which describes the works of 84 French museums, including the Louvre: 52 self-portraits from the National Galleries of Scotland catalogue of self portraits by the Royal Society of Portrait Painters 2007 Authority control GND: 4054394-8 NDL: 01039993 Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Self-portrait&oldid=718675347" Categories: Painting Art genres Portrait art Portraits Self-portraits Hidden categories: CS1 errors: dates All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from April 2014 Articles with French-language external links Commons category with local link different than on Wikidata Wikipedia articles with GND identifiers Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Article Talk Variants Views Read Edit View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Featured content Current events Random article Donate to Wikipedia Wikipedia store Interaction Help About Wikipedia Community portal Recent changes Contact page Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Cite this page Print/export Create a book Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Languages Alemannisch العربية Azərbaycanca Беларуская Български Bosanski Brezhoneg Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն Hrvatski Italiano עברית Қазақша Кыргызча Lietuvių Magyar മലയാളം Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Oʻzbekcha/ўзбекча Polski Português Română Русский Scots Simple English Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska ไทย Українська 中文 Edit links This page was last modified on 4 May 2016, at 23:03. Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view