Pharmacology - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Pharmacology From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to: navigation, search For the Wikipedia Manual of Style for Pharmacology, see WP:PHARMMOS "Biochemical pharmacology" redirects here. For the journal, see Biochemical Pharmacology (journal). A variety of topics involved with pharmacology, including neuropharmacology, renal pharmacology, human metabolism, intracellular metabolism, and intracellular regulation Pharmacology is the branch of medicine and biology concerned with the study of drug action,[1] where a drug can be broadly defined as any man-made, natural, or endogenous (from within body) molecule which exerts a biochemical and/or physiological effect on the cell, tissue, organ, or organism (sometimes the word pharmacon is used as a term to encompass these endogenous and exogenous bioactive species). More specifically, it is the study of the interactions that occur between a living organism and chemicals that affect normal or abnormal biochemical function. If substances have medicinal properties, they are considered pharmaceuticals. The field encompasses drug composition and properties, synthesis and drug design, molecular and cellular mechanisms, organ/systems mechanisms, signal transduction/cellular communication, molecular diagnostics, interactions, toxicology, chemical biology, therapy, and medical applications and antipathogenic capabilities. The two main areas of pharmacology are pharmacodynamics and pharmacokinetics. The former studies the effects of the drug on biological systems, and the latter the effects of biological systems on the drug. In broad terms, pharmacodynamics discusses the chemicals with biological receptors, and pharmacokinetics discusses the absorption, distribution, metabolism, and excretion (ADME) of chemicals from the biological systems. Pharmacology is not synonymous with pharmacy and the two terms are frequently confused. Pharmacology, a biomedical science, deals with the research, discovery, and characterization of chemicals which show biological effects and the elucidation of cellular and organismal function in relation to these chemicals. In contrast, pharmacy, a health services profession, is concerned with application of the principles learned from pharmacology in its clinical settings; whether it be in a dispensing or clinical care role. In either field, the primary contrast between the two are their distinctions between direct-patient care, for pharmacy practice, and the science-oriented research field, driven by pharmacology. The origins of clinical pharmacology date back to the Middle Ages in Avicenna's The Canon of Medicine, Peter of Spain's Commentary on Isaac, and John of St Amand's Commentary on the Antedotary of Nicholas.[2] Clinical pharmacology owes much of its foundation to the work of William Withering.[3] Pharmacology as a scientific discipline did not further advance until the mid-19th century amid the great biomedical resurgence of that period.[4] Before the second half of the nineteenth century, the remarkable potency and specificity of the actions of drugs such as morphine, quinine and digitalis were explained vaguely and with reference to extraordinary chemical powers and affinities to certain organs or tissues.[5] The first pharmacology department was set up by Rudolf Buchheim in 1847, in recognition of the need to understand how therapeutic drugs and poisons produced their effects.[4] Early pharmacologists focused on natural substances, mainly plant extracts. Pharmacology developed in the 19th century as a biomedical science that applied the principles of scientific experimentation to therapeutic contexts.[6] Today pharmacologists use genetics, molecular biology, chemistry, and other advanced tools to transform information about molecular mechanisms and targets into therapies directed against disease, defects or pathogens, and create methods for preventative care, diagnostics, and ultimately personalized medicine. Contents 1 Divisions 1.1 Clinical pharmacology 1.2 Neuropharmacology 1.3 Psychopharmacology 1.4 Cardiovascular pharmacology 1.5 Pharmacogenetics 1.6 Pharmacogenomics 1.7 Pharmacoepidemiology 1.8 Systems pharmacology 1.9 Toxicology 1.10 Theoretical pharmacology 1.11 Posology 1.12 Pharmacognosy 1.13 Environmental pharmacology 1.14 Dental pharmacology 2 Scientific background 3 Medicine development and safety testing 4 Drug legislation and safety 5 Education 6 See also 7 Notes and references 8 External links Divisions[edit] The discipline of pharmacology can be divided into many sub disciplines each with a specific focus. Clinical pharmacology[edit] Clinical pharmacology is the basic science of pharmacology with an added focus on the application of pharmacological principles and methods in the medical clinic and towards patient care and outcomes. Neuropharmacology[edit] Neuropharmacology is the study of the effects of medication on central and peripheral nervous system functioning. Psychopharmacology[edit] Psychopharmacology, also known as behavioral pharmacology, is the study of the effects of medication on the psyche (psychology), observing changed behaviors of the body and mind, and how molecular events are manifest in a measurable behavioral form. This is similar to the closely related ethnopharmacology. Psychopharmacology is an interdisciplinary field which studies behavioral effects of psychoactive drugs. It incorporates approaches and techniques from neuropharmacology, animal behavior and behavioral neuroscience, and is interested in the behavioral and neurobiological mechanisms of action of psychoactive drugs. Another goal of behavioral pharmacology is to develop animal behavioral models to screen chemical compounds with therapeutic potentials. People in this field (called behavioral pharmacologists) typically use small animals (e.g. rodents) to study psychotherapeutic drugs such as antipsychotics, antidepressants and anxiolytics, and drugs of abuse such as nicotine, cocaine, methamphetamine, etc. study of drugs which affect behavior. Ethopharmacology (not to be confused with ethnopharmacology) is a term which has been in use since the 1960s[7] and derives from the Greek word "ethos" meaning character and "pharmacology" the study of drug actions and mechanism. Cardiovascular pharmacology[edit] Cardiovascular pharmacology is the study of the effects of drugs on the entire cardiovascular system, including the heart and blood vessels. Pharmacogenetics[edit] Pharmacogenetics is clinical testing of genetic variation that gives rise to differing response to drugs. Pharmacogenomics[edit] Pharmacogenomics is the application of genomic technologies to drug discovery and further characterization of older drugs. Identification of the genetic basis for polymorphic expression of a gene is done through intronic or exomic single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) which abolishes the need for different mechanisms for explaining the variability in drug metabolism. SNPs based variations in membrane receptors lead to multidrug resistance (MDR) and the drug–drug interactions. Even drug induced toxicity and many adverse effects can be explained by GWA studies. The multitude of SNPs help in understanding gene pharmacokinetic (PK) or pharmacodynamic (PD) pathways.[8] Pharmacoepidemiology[edit] Pharmacoepidemiology is the study of the effects of drugs in large numbers of people. Systems pharmacology[edit] Systems pharmacology is the application of systems biology principles to the field of pharmacology. Toxicology[edit] Toxicology is the study of the adverse effects, molecular targets, and characterization of drugs or any chemical substance in excess (including those beneficial in lower doses). Theoretical pharmacology[edit] Theoretical pharmacology is a relatively new and rapidly expanding field of research activity in which many of the techniques of computational chemistry, in particular computational quantum chemistry and the method of molecular mechanics, are proving to be of great value. Theoretical pharmacologists aim at rationalizing the relation between the activity of a particular drug, as observed experimentally, and its structural features as derived from computer experiments. They aim to find structure—activity relations. Furthermore, on the basis of the structure of a given organic molecule, the theoretical pharmacologist aims at predicting the biological activity of new drugs that are of the same general type as existing drugs. More ambitiously, it aims to predict entirely new classes of drugs, tailor-made for specific purposes. Posology[edit] Posology is the study of how medicines are dosed. It also depends upon various factors including age, climate, weight, sex, and time of administration. It is derived from the Greek words posos meaning how much and logos meaning science. Pharmacognosy[edit] Pharmacognosy is a branch of pharmacology dealing especially with the composition, use, and development of medicinal substances of biological origin and especially medicinal substances obtained from plants. Environmental pharmacology[edit] Environmental pharmacology is a new discipline.[9] Focus is being given to understand gene–environment interaction, drug-environment interaction and toxin-environment interaction. There is a close collaboration between environmental science and medicine in addressing these issues, as healthcare itself can be a cause of environmental damage or remediation. Human health and ecology are intimately related. Demand for more pharmaceutical products may place the public at risk through the destruction of species. The entry of chemicals and drugs into the aquatic ecosystem is a more serious concern today. In addition, the production of some illegal drugs pollutes drinking water supply by releasing carcinogens.[10] This field is intimately linked with Public Health fields. Dental pharmacology[edit] Dental pharmacology relates to the study of drugs commonly used in the treatment of dental disease.[11] Scientific background[edit] The study of chemicals requires intimate knowledge of the biological system affected. With the knowledge of cell biology and biochemistry increasing, the field of pharmacology has also changed substantially. It has become possible, through molecular analysis of receptors, to design chemicals that act on specific cellular signaling or metabolic pathways by affecting sites directly on cell-surface receptors (which modulate and mediate cellular signaling pathways controlling cellular function). A chemical has, from the pharmacological point-of-view, various properties. Pharmacokinetics describes the effect of the body on the chemical (e.g. half-life and volume of distribution), and pharmacodynamics describes the chemical's effect on the body (desired or toxic). When describing the pharmacokinetic properties of the chemical that is the active ingredient or active pharmaceutical ingredient (API), pharmacologists are often interested in L-ADME: Liberation – How is the API disintegrated (for solid oral forms (breaking down into smaller particles)), dispersed, or dissolved from the medication? Absorption – How is the API absorbed (through the skin, the intestine, the oral mucosa)? Distribution – How does the API spread through the organism? Metabolism – Is the API converted chemically inside the body, and into which substances. Are these active (as well)? Could they be toxic? Excretion – How is the API excreted (through the bile, urine, breath, skin)? Medication is said to have a narrow or wide therapeutic index or therapeutic window. This describes the ratio of desired effect to toxic effect. A compound with a narrow therapeutic index (close to one) exerts its desired effect at a dose close to its toxic dose. A compound with a wide therapeutic index (greater than five) exerts its desired effect at a dose substantially below its toxic dose. Those with a narrow margin are more difficult to dose and administer, and may require therapeutic drug monitoring (examples are warfarin, some antiepileptics, aminoglycoside antibiotics). Most anti-cancer drugs have a narrow therapeutic margin: toxic side-effects are almost always encountered at doses used to kill tumors. Medicine development and safety testing[edit] Development of medication is a vital concern to medicine, but also has strong economical and political implications. To protect the consumer and prevent abuse, many governments regulate the manufacture, sale, and administration of medication. In the United States, the main body that regulates pharmaceuticals is the Food and Drug Administration and they enforce standards set by the United States Pharmacopoeia. In the European Union, the main body that regulates pharmaceuticals is the EMEA and they enforce standards set by the European Pharmacopoeia. The metabolic stability and the reactivity of a library of candidate drug compounds have to be assessed for drug metabolism and toxicological studies. Many methods have been proposed for quantitative predictions in drug metabolism; one example of a recent computational method is SPORCalc.[12] If the chemical structure of a medicinal compound is altered slightly, this could slightly or dramatically alter the medicinal properties of the compound depending on the level of alteration as it relates to the structural composition of the substrate or receptor site on which it exerts its medicinal effect, a concept referred to as the structural activity relationship (SAR). This means that when a useful activity has been identified, chemists will make many similar compounds called analogues, in an attempt to maximize the desired medicinal effect(s) of the compound. This development phase can take anywhere from a few years to a decade or more and is very expensive.[13] These new analogues need to be developed. It needs to be determined how safe the medicine is for human consumption, its stability in the human body and the best form for delivery to the desired organ system, like tablet or aerosol. After extensive testing, which can take up to 6 years, the new medicine is ready for marketing and selling.[13] As a result of the long time required to develop analogues and test a new medicine and the fact that of every 5000 potential new medicines typically only one will ever reach the open market, this is an expensive way of doing things, often costing over 1 billion dollars. To recoup this outlay pharmaceutical companies may do a number of things:[13] Carefully research the demand for their potential new product before spending an outlay of company funds.[13] Obtain a patent on the new medicine preventing other companies from producing that medicine for a certain allocation of time.[13] Drug legislation and safety[edit] In the United States, the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) is responsible for creating guidelines for the approval and use of drugs. The FDA requires that all approved drugs fulfill two requirements: The drug must be found to be effective against the disease for which it is seeking approval (where 'effective' means only that the drug performed better than placebo or competitors in at least two trials). The drug must meet safety criteria by being subject to animal and controlled human testing. Gaining FDA approval usually takes several years to attain. Testing done on animals must be extensive and must include several species to help in the evaluation of both the effectiveness and toxicity of the drug. The dosage of any drug approved for use is intended to fall within a range in which the drug produces a therapeutic effect or desired outcome.[14] The safety and effectiveness of prescription drugs in the U.S. is regulated by the federal Prescription Drug Marketing Act of 1987. The Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency (MHRA) has a similar role in the UK. Education[edit] This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (February 2016) Students of pharmacology are trained as biomedical scientists, studying the effects of drugs on living organisms. This can lead to new drug discoveries, as well as a better understanding of the way in which the human body works. Students of pharmacology must have detailed working knowledge of aspects in physiology, pathology and chemistry. During a typical degree they will cover areas such as (but not limited to) biochemistry, cell biology, basic physiology, genetics & the Central Dogma, medical microbiology, neuroscience, and depending on the department's interests, bio-organic chemistry and/or chemical biology. Modern Pharmacology is highly interdisciplinary. Graduate programs accept students from most biological and chemical backgrounds. With the increasing drive towards biophysical and computational research to describe systems, pharmacologists may even consider themselves mainly physical scientists. In many instances, Analytical Chemistry is closely related to the studies and needs of pharmacological research. Therefore, many institutions will include pharmacology under a Chemistry or Biochemistry Department, especially if a separate Pharmacology Dept. does not exist. What makes an institutional department independent of another, or exist in the first place, is usually an artifact of historical times. Whereas a pharmacy student will eventually work in a pharmacy dispensing medications, a pharmacologist will typically work within a laboratory setting. Careers for a pharmacologist include academic positions (medical and non-medical), governmental positions, private industrial positions, science writing, scientific patents and law, consultation, biotech and pharmaceutical employment, the alcohol industry, food industry, forensics/law enforcement, public health, and environmental/ecological sciences. See also[edit] Certain safety factor Cosmeceuticals Crude drugs Nicholas Culpeper – 17th century English Physician who translated and used 'pharmacological texts'. Drug design Drug Discovery Hit to Lead Drug metabolism Enzyme inhibitors Herbalism History of pharmacy International Union of Basic and Clinical Pharmacology Inverse benefit law List of abbreviations used in medical prescriptions List of pharmaceutical companies List of withdrawn drugs Medical School Medicare Part D – the new prescription drug plan in the U.S. Medication Medicinal chemistry Neuropharmacology – The Molecular and Behavior study of Disease and Drugs in the Nervous System Neuropsychopharmacology – The detailed comprehensive study of mind, brain and drugs. Pharmaceutical company Pharmaceutical formulation Pharmaceuticals and personal care products in the environment Pharmacognosy Pharmacopoeia Pharmacotherapy Pharmakos Placebo (origins of technical term) Prescription drug Prescription Drug Marketing Act (PDMA) Psychopharmacology – medication for mental conditions Traditional Chinese Medicine Notes and references[edit] ^ Vallance P, Smart TG (January 2006). "The future of pharmacology". British Journal of Pharmacology. 147 Suppl 1 (S1): S304–7. doi:10.1038/sj.bjp.0706454. PMC 1760753. PMID 16402118.  ^ Brater DC, Daly WJ (May 2000). "Clinical pharmacology in the Middle Ages: principles that presage the 21st century". Clin. Pharmacol. Ther. 67 (5): 447–50. doi:10.1067/mcp.2000.106465. PMID 10824622.  ^ Mannfred A. Hollinger (2003)."Introduction to pharmacology". CRC Press. p.4. ISBN 0-415-28033-8 ^ a b Rang HP (January 2006). "The receptor concept: pharmacology's big idea". Br. J. Pharmacol. 147 Suppl 1 (S1): S9–16. doi:10.1038/sj.bjp.0706457. PMC 1760743. PMID 16402126.  ^ Maehle AH, Prüll CR, Halliwell RF (August 2002). "The emergence of the drug receptor theory". Nat Rev Drug Discov 1 (8): 637–41. doi:10.1038/nrd875. PMID 12402503.  CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list (link) ^ Rang, H.P.; M.M. Dale; J.M. Ritter; R.J. Flower (2007). Pharmacology. China: Elsevier. ISBN 0-443-06911-5.  ^ Krsiak, M (1991). "Ethopharmacology: A historical perspective". Neuroscience and biobehavioral reviews 15 (4): 439–45. doi:10.1016/s0149-7634(05)80124-1. PMID 1792005.  ^ Fareed M., Afzal M (2013). "Single nucleotide polymorphism in genome-wide association of human population: A tool for broad spectrum service". Egyptian Journal of Medical Human Genetics 14 (2): 123–134. doi:10.1016/j.ejmhg.2012.08.001.  ^ Rahman, SZ; Khan, RA (Dec 2006). "Environmental pharmacology: A new discipline". Indian J Pharmacol. 38 (4): 229–30. doi:10.4103/0253-7613.27017.  ^ Sue Ruhoy Ilene, Daughton Christian G (2008). "Beyond the medicine cabinet: An analysis of where and why medications accumulate". Environment International 34 (8): 1157–1169. doi:10.1016/j.envint.2008.05.002.  ^ "Dental Pharmacology". nba.uth.tmc.edu. Texas Medical Center. Retrieved 22 May 2015.  ^ James Smith; Viktor Stein (2009). "SPORCalc: A development of a database analysis that provides putative metabolic enzyme reactions for ligand-based drug design". Computational Biology and Chemistry 33 (2): 149–159. doi:10.1016/j.compbiolchem.2008.11.002. PMID 19157988.  ^ a b c d e Newton, David; Alasdair Thorpe; Chris Otter (2004). Revise A2 Chemistry. Heinemann Educational Publishers. p. 1. ISBN 0-435-58347-6.  ^ Nagle, Hinter; Barbara Nagle (2005). Pharmacology: An Introduction. Boston: McGraw Hill. ISBN 0-07-312275-0.  External links[edit] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Pharmacology. American Society for Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics British Pharmacological Society Pharmaceutical company profiles at NNDB International Conference on Harmonisation US Pharmacopeia International Union of Basic and Clinical Pharmacology IUPHAR Committee on Receptor Nomenclature and Drug Classification v t e Concepts in pharmacology Pharmacokinetics (L)ADME: (Liberation) Absorption Distribution Metabolism Excretion (Clearance) Loading dose Volume of distribution (Initial) Rate of infusion Compartment Bioequivalence Bioavailability Onset of action Biological half-life Plasma protein binding Therapeutic index (LD50/ED50) Pharmacodynamics Toxicity (Neurotoxicology) Dose–response relationship (Efficacy, Potency) Antimicrobial pharmacodynamics: Minimum inhibitory concentration/Bacteriostatic Minimum bactericidal concentration/Bactericide Agonism and antagonism Agonist: Inverse agonist Irreversible agonist Partial agonist Superagonist Physiological agonist Antagonist: Competitive antagonist Irreversible antagonist Physiological antagonist Other: Binding Affinity Binding selectivity Functional selectivity Other Drug tolerance: Tachyphylaxis Drug resistance: Antibiotic resistance Multiple drug resistance Drug discovery strategies Classical pharmacology Reverse pharmacology Related fields/subfields Pharmacogenetics Pharmacogenomics Neuropsychopharmacology (Neuropharmacology, Psychopharmacology) v t e Pharmacology: major drug groups Gastrointestinal tract/ metabolism (A) stomach acid Antacids H2 antagonists Proton pump inhibitors Antiemetics Laxatives Antidiarrhoeals/Antipropulsives Anti-obesity drugs Anti-diabetics Vitamins Dietary minerals Blood and blood forming organs (B) Antithrombotics Antiplatelets Anticoagulants Thrombolytics/fibrinolytics Antihemorrhagics Platelets Coagulants Antifibrinolytics Cardiovascular system (C) cardiac therapy/antianginals Cardiac glycosides Antiarrhythmics Cardiac stimulants Antihypertensives Diuretics Vasodilators Beta blockers Calcium channel blockers renin-angiotensin system ACE inhibitors Angiotensin II receptor antagonists Renin inhibitors Antihyperlipidemics Statins Fibrates Bile acid sequestrants Skin (D) Emollients Cicatrizants Antipruritics Antipsoriatics Medicated dressings Genitourinary system (G) Hormonal contraception Fertility agents SERMs Sex hormones Endocrine system (H) Hypothalamic-pituitary hormones Corticosteroids Glucocorticoids Mineralocorticoids Sex hormones Thyroid hormones/Antithyroid agents Infections and infestations (J, P, QI) Antimicrobials: Antibacterials (Antimycobacterials) Antifungals Antivirals Antiparasitics Antiprotozoals Anthelmintics Ectoparasiticides IVIG Vaccines Malignant disease (L01-L02) Anticancer agents Antimetabolites Alkylating Spindle poisons Antineoplastic Topoisomerase inhibitors Immune disease (L03-L04) Immunomodulators Immunostimulants Immunosuppressants Muscles, bones, and joints (M) Anabolic steroids Anti-inflammatories NSAIDs Antirheumatics Corticosteroids Muscle relaxants Bisphosphonates Brain and nervous system (N) Analgesics Anesthetics General Local Anorectics Anti-ADHD Agents Antiaddictives Anticonvulsants Antidementia Agents Antidepressants Antimigraine Agents Antiparkinson's Agents Antipsychotics Anxiolytics Depressants Entactogens Entheogens Euphoriants Hallucinogens Psychedelics Dissociatives Deliriants Hypnotics/Sedatives Mood Stabilizers Neuroprotectives Nootropics Neurotoxins Orexigenics Serenics Stimulants Wakefulness-Promoting Agents Respiratory system (R) Decongestants Bronchodilators Cough medicines H1 antagonists Sensory organs (S) Ophthalmologicals Otologicals Other ATC (V) Antidotes Contrast media Radiopharmaceuticals Dressings v t e Branches of chemistry Dictionary of chemical formulas List of biomolecules List of inorganic compounds Periodic table Physical Chemical kinetics Chemical physics Electrochemistry Femtochemistry Geochemistry Photochemistry Quantum chemistry Solid-state chemistry Spectroscopy Surface science Thermochemistry Organic Biochemistry Bioorganic chemistry Biophysical chemistry Chemical biology Clinical chemistry Fullerene chemistry Medicinal chemistry Neurochemistry Organic chemistry Pharmacy Physical organic chemistry Polymer chemistry Inorganic Bioinorganic chemistry Cluster chemistry Coordination chemistry Inorganic chemistry Materials science Nuclear chemistry Organometallic chemistry Others Actinide chemistry Analytical chemistry Astrochemistry Chemistry education Clay chemistry Click chemistry Computational chemistry Cosmochemistry Environmental chemistry Food chemistry Forensic chemistry Green chemistry Post-mortem chemistry Supramolecular chemistry Theoretical chemistry Wet chemistry Category Portal Commons WikiProject v t e Technology Outline of technology Outline of applied science Fields Agriculture Agricultural engineering Aquaculture Fisheries science Food chemistry Food engineering Food microbiology Food technology GURT ICT Nutrition Biomedical Bioinformatics Biological engineering Biomechatronics Biomedical engineering Biotechnology Cheminformatics Genetic engineering Healthcare science Medical research Medical technology Nanomedicine Neuroscience Neurotechnology Pharmacology Reproductive technology Tissue engineering Buildings and Construction Acoustical engineering Architectural engineering Building services engineering Civil engineering Construction engineering Domestic technology Facade engineering Fire protection engineering Safety engineering Sanitary engineering Structural engineering Educational Educational software Digital technologies in education ICT in education Impact Multimedia learning Virtual campus Virtual education Energy Nuclear engineering Nuclear technology Petroleum engineering Soft energy technology Environmental Clean technology Clean coal technology Ecological design Ecological engineering Ecotechnology Environmental engineering Environmental engineering science Green building Green nanotechnology Landscape engineering Renewable energy Sustainable design Sustainable engineering Industrial Automation Business informatics Engineering management Enterprise engineering Financial engineering Industrial biotechnology Industrial engineering Metallurgy Mining engineering Productivity improving technologies Research and development Tribology IT and communications Artificial intelligence Broadcast engineering Computer engineering Computer science Financial technology Information technology Music technology Ontology engineering RF engineering Software engineering Telecommunications engineering Visual technology Web engineering Military Army engineering maintenance Electronic warfare Military communications Military engineering Stealth technology Transport Aerospace engineering Automotive engineering Naval architecture Space technology Traffic engineering Transport engineering Others applied science Cryogenics Electro-optics Electronics Engineering geology Engineering physics Hydraulics Materials science Microfabrication Nanoengineering engineering (list) Audio Biochemical Ceramic Chemical Polymer Control Electrical Electronic Entertainment Geotechnical Hydraulic Mechanical Mechatronics Optical Protein Quantum Robotics Animatronics Systems Components Infrastructure Invention Timeline Knowledge Machine Skill Craft Tool Gadget Scales Femtotechnology Picotechnology Nanotechnology Microtechnology Macro-engineering Megascale engineering History Prehistoric technology Neolithic Revolution Ancient technology Medieval technology Renaissance technology Industrial Revolution Second Atomic Age Jet Age Space Age Digital Revolution Information Age Theories and concepts Appropriate technology Collingridge dilemma Critique of technology Diffusion of innovations Disruptive innovation Dual-use technology Ephemeralization High tech Hype cycle Low-technology Mature technology Strategy of Technology Technicism Techno-progressivism Technocapitalism Technocentrism Technocracy Technocriticism Technoculture Technoethics Technoetic Technogaianism Technolibertarianism Technological alliance Technological apartheid Technological change Technological convergence Technological determinism Technological escalation Technological evolution Technological fix Technological innovation system Technological momentum Technological nationalism Technological paradigm Technological rationality Technological revival Technological revolution Technological self-efficacy Technological singularity Singularitarianism Technological somnambulism Technological transitions Technological unemployment Technological utopianism Technology lifecycle Technology acceptance model Technology adoption lifecycle Technomancy Technopaganism Technorealism Technoromanticism Technoscience feminist Transhumanism Other Emerging technologies List Fictional technology High-technology business districts Kardashev scale List of technologies Philosophy of technology Ethics of technology Science, technology and society Technology dynamics Science and technology by country STEM fields Pre-STEM women STEAM fields Technology alignment Technology assessment Technology brokering Technology companies Technology demonstration Technology education Technical universities and colleges Technology evangelist Technology fusion Technology governance Technology integration Technology journalism Technology management Technology museum Technology policy Technology shock Technology strategy Technology and society Technology transfer Technophilia Technophobia Technoself Technosexual Technosignature Technostress Terotechnology Book Category Commons Portal Wikiquotes Pharmacy and pharmacology portal Authority control LCCN: sh85100599 GND: 4045687-0 NDL: 00574204 Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Pharmacology&oldid=717324278" Categories: Pharmacology Biochemistry Life sciences industry Hidden categories: CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list Use dmy dates from March 2014 Articles needing additional references from February 2016 All articles needing additional references Commons category with page title same as on Wikidata Wikipedia articles with LCCN identifiers Wikipedia articles with GND identifiers Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Article Talk Variants Views Read Edit View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Featured content Current events Random article Donate to Wikipedia Wikipedia store Interaction Help About Wikipedia Community portal Recent changes Contact page Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Cite this page Print/export Create a book Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikibooks Languages العربية Azərbaycanca বাংলা Bân-lâm-gú Беларуская (тарашкевіца)‎ Български Bosanski Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Gaeilge Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Íslenska Italiano עברית ქართული Қазақша Kurdî Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Македонски മലയാളം Bahasa Melayu မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Oʻzbekcha/ўзбекча پښتو Polski Português Română Русский Shqip සිංහල Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Basa Sunda Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் Татарча/tatarça ไทย Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt Winaray 中文 Edit links This page was last modified on 27 April 2016, at 01:24. Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view