Elsevier (magazine) - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Elsevier (magazine) From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to: navigation, search Elsevier Editor Arendo Joustra Categories News magazine Frequency Weekly Publisher Reed Business Information Total circulation (2015) 86,409 First issue 27 October 1945 (1945-10-27) Country Netherlands Based in Amsterdam Language Dutch Website www.elsevier.nl OCLC number 60615878 Elsevier is a Dutch weekly news magazine. With a circulation of over 86,000 copies as of 2015,[1] it is the Netherlands' most popular news magazine.[2] Its chief editor is Arendo Joustra.[3] Elsevier focuses mainly on politics, international affairs and business. In terms of scope of articles it is best comparable to Germany's Focus, Belgium's Knack or America's Time Magazine. Like Time Magazine, Elsevier runs a yearly coverstory about a Person of the Year. The magazine is, together with HP/De Tijd, Vrij Nederland and De Groene Amsterdammer, conventionally considered to be one of the most influential written media in the Dutch language area. Views expressed are generally conservative right wing.[citation needed] Contents 1 History and profile 2 Circulation 3 References 4 External links History and profile[edit] The predecessor of the magazine, Elsevier's Geïllustreerd Maandschrift (Elsevier's Illustrated Monthly), was first issued in January 1891 and was modelled after Harper's Magazine. It was published by J.G. Robbers and his Elsevier company, which had been founded in 1880 and took its name from the famous (but unrelated) Elzevir family of the 16th to 18th centuries. In 1940, the magazine was prohibited by the German authorities, who occupied the Netherlands at the time, and the last issue of the magazine was issued in December that year.[4] Henk Lunshof, an editor of De Telegraaf, had thought of establishing a new news magazine since 1940. He was approached by Jan Pieter Klautz, director of the publishing company Elsevier, and two secretly started preparing the establishment of the magazine. They were assisted by G.B.J. Hiltermann, another former editor of De Telegraaf. The magazine was finally introduced as Elseviers Weekblad ("Elsevier's Weekly") on 27 October 1945, and Lunshof became its editor. Its aim was to take an independent position, not linked to any political party or association. By the end of the 1940s, however, EW adopted a clear position against the independence of Indonesia, after which it developed a socially conservative and economically liberal signature, closely linked to the liberals of the VVD and the Catholics of the KVP. The communists would later take up the role of enemy of EW. This sidedness and increasingly old-fashioned image of the magazine sparked the demand for a new leadership and a new formula. The new editor in chief André Spoor, formerly editor in chief of NRC Handelsblad, renewed the redaction, changed the layout and shortened the name to Elsevier. In the following years, the magazine lost its literary character and started focussing on journalism. It claims that while opinion pieces remained, it became less ideological and more factual.[2] Circulation[edit] In 2001 Elsevier had a circulation of 129,000 copies.[5] In 2010 the circulation of the magazine was 135,838 copies.[6] It was 384,878 copies in 2013.[1] References[edit] ^ a b "Oplagen tijdschriften". Sectorinstituut Openbare Bibliotheken (in Dutch). Retrieved 6 December 2014.  ^ a b "Oplagecijfers van NOM". NOMmedia.nl (in Dutch). Retrieved 5 November 2015.  ^ "Arendo Joustra". Elsevier.nl (in Dutch). Retrieved 6 December 2014.  ^ "Elsevier's Geïllustreerd Maandschrift (1891-1940)". Elseviermaandschrift.nl (in Dutch). Retrieved 6 December 2014.  ^ "Top 50 Finance/Business/News magazines worldwide (by circulation)" (Report). Magazine Organization. Retrieved 13 December 2014.  ^ "World Magazine Trends 2010/2011" (PDF). FIPP. Retrieved 2 April 2015.  External links[edit] Official website (Mobile) v t e RELX Group Elsevier Imprints Academic Press Anderson Bailliere Tindall Butterworth-Heinemann Cell Press Chandos Publishing Churchill Livingstone Current Opinion Gulf Professional Publishers Hanley & Belfus Masson Morgan Kaufmann Mosby Newness Pergamon Saunders Security Executive Council Syngress Urban & Fischer William Andrew Woodhead Publishing Selected journals Biochimica et Biophysica Acta Cell The Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology The Lancet Tetrahedron Trends Other ClinicalKey Compendex Embase GEOBASE HESI Knovel Mendeley Reaxys ScienceDirect Scopus LexisNexis Butterworths CaseMap JurisClasseur Law360 LexisNexis Risk Solutions Martindale-Hubbell Matthew Bender Quicklaw Shepard's Citations Tolley Zap Reed Business Information Germany DETAIL Netherlands AllAboutFeed Beleggers Belangen Bizz Boerderij Elsevier Meat International Pig Progress World Poultry United Kingdom Airline Business Bankersalmanac Community Care Employers' Law Estates Gazette Farmers Weekly Flight International ICIS Irish Medical Times Kellysearch MIMS Ireland New Scientist Personnel Today Poultry World XpertHR Zibb United States CMD (49%) Reed Exhibitions Arabian Travel Market Chicago Comic & Entertainment Expo Equitana Global Gaming Expo MIPCOM MIPIM New York Comic Con London Book Fair Penny Arcade Expo World Travel Market Category Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Elsevier_(magazine)&oldid=707612448" Categories: 1945 establishments in the Netherlands Dutch magazines Dutch-language magazines Dutch weekly magazines Elsevier Magazines established in 1945 Media in Amsterdam News magazines Political magazines Hidden categories: CS1 Dutch-language sources (nl) All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from December 2014 Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Article Talk Variants Views Read Edit View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Featured content Current events Random article Donate to Wikipedia Wikipedia store Interaction Help About Wikipedia Community portal Recent changes Contact page Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Cite this page Print/export Create a book Download as PDF Printable version Languages Deutsch Français Nederlands Edit links This page was last modified on 29 February 2016, at 20:52. Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view