Charter for the Kingdom of the Netherlands - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Charter for the Kingdom of the Netherlands From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to: navigation, search This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (December 2014) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) Kingdom of the Netherlands This article is part of a series on the politics and government of the Netherlands Constitution Charter Wet Algemene Bepalingen Human rights Monarchy King Willem-Alexander Council of Ministers Ministers Plenipotentiary Aruba Curaçao St. Maarten Cabinet Prime Minister (list) Mark Rutte Deputy Prime Minister Lodewijk Asscher Cabinet (list) Current cabinet (69th / Rutte 2) States General Senate President: Ankie Broekers-Knol Current membership Historic composition House of Representatives Speaker: vacant Current membership Historic composition Parliamentary committees Judiciary Supreme Court High Councils of State Council of State Court of Audit National Ombudsman Elections Recent elections General: 2006 2010 2012 Provincial: 2007 2011 2015 Municipal: 2006 2010 2014 European: 2004 2009 2014 Referendums Referendums: 2005 2016 Political parties Politicians Local government Provincial politics Water boards Municipal politics BES islands Foreign relations Diplomatic missions of the Netherlands to the Netherlands Related topics Law of the Netherlands Social Economic Council Central Bank Contemporary history Other countries Atlas Politics portal v t e The Charter for the Kingdom of the Netherlands (in Dutch: Statuut voor het Koninkrijk der Nederlanden; in Papiamentu: Statuut pa e Reino di Hulanda) describes the political relationship between the four different countries which form the Kingdom of the Netherlands: Aruba, Curaçao, and Sint Maarten in the Caribbean and the Netherlands (for the most part) in Europe. It is the leading legal document of the Kingdom. The Constitution of the Netherlands and the Basic Laws of the three other countries are legally subordinate to the Charter. The first version of the Charter, which described the relationship between the Netherlands, Suriname, and the Netherlands Antilles, was signed by Queen Juliana on 15 December 1954. Contents 1 Countries 2 Constitution 3 Affairs of the Kingdom 4 Other provisions 5 Future status 6 See also 7 References Countries[edit] The four countries mentioned in the Charter are the Netherlands, Aruba, Curaçao, and Sint Maarten. The Charter stipulates that the Netherlands is governed according to the provisions of the Constitution for the Kingdom of the Netherlands and that Aruba, Curaçao and Sint Maarten are governed according to their respective Basic Laws. Constitution[edit] Until 1954 the Constitution for the Kingdom of the Netherlands was the leading document of the Kingdom. It remains, however, the document in which, according to Article 5 of the Charter, the institutions of the Kingdom are regulated. These institutions, as regulated in the Constitution for the Kingdom of the Netherlands, govern the Netherlands proper. The Charter itself gives additional regulations for these institutions for the purposes of the Kingdom as a whole. The Netherlands is the only one of the four countries which conducts its business internally and externally as the Kingdom of the Netherlands. Affairs of the Kingdom[edit] The Charter states explicitly which elements of lawmaking and policy that involve Aruba, Curaçao and/or Sint Maarten are to be dealt with on the level of the Kingdom as a whole and are thus valid for all four countries. Any matter not explicitly mentioned to be an affair of the Kingdom that involves Aruba, Curaçao, and/or Sint Maarten is considered to be an affair of the different countries. Affairs of the Kingdom that do not involve Aruba, Curaçao and/or Sint Maarten are dealt with according to the provisions of the Constitution for the Kingdom of the Netherlands. In practice by the Netherlands alone, in its capacity as the Kingdom of the Netherlands. Responsibility for affairs of the Kingdom that involve Aruba, Curaçao and/or Sint Maarten rests with the Council of Ministers of the Kingdom. The affairs of the Kingdom are: maintenance of the independence and the defence of the Kingdom; foreign relations; Netherlands nationality; regulation of the orders of chivalry, the flag and the coat of arms of the Kingdom; regulation of the nationality of vessels and the standards required for the safety and navigation of seagoing vessels flying the flag of the Kingdom, with the exception of sailing ships; supervision of the general rules governing the admission and expulsion of Netherlands nationals and aliens; extradition. Other provisions[edit] In addition, the Charter contains provisions on mutual assistance and co-operation between the four countries. All four countries are, per the Charter, obliged to promote the realisation of human rights and good governance. The Charter can only be amended with the approval of all four countries. Future status[edit] Main article: Dissolution of the Netherlands Antilles The Netherlands Antilles were disbanded on October 10, 2010. The idea of the Netherlands Antilles as a state never enjoyed the full support of all of the islands, and political relations between islands were often strained. Aruba seceded from the Netherlands Antilles in 1986. The desire for secession had also been strong in Sint Maarten.[1] See also[edit] Aruba Koninkrijksdag Netherlands Antilles Sint Maarten Curaçao References[edit] ^ "Antillen opgeheven op 10-10-2010" (in Dutch). NOS. 2009-10-01. Retrieved 2009-10-01.  v t e Netherlands articles Part of the Kingdom of the Netherlands History Prehistory Iron age Germanic tribes Roman Era Frisii, Chamavi, Batavi, Cananefates Migration Period Saxons, Frisians, Franks Dorestad, Utrecht Development urban centers Frisian Kingdom Frankish Kingdom Middle Francia Lower Lorraine Flanders, Holland, Frisian Freedom Brabant, Guelders Holy Roman Empire Burgundian Netherlands Habsburg Netherlands Renaissance Seventeen Provinces Spanish Netherlands Eighty Years' War Dutch Republic Golden Age Batavian Revolution Batavian Republic Kingdom of Holland First French Empire Principality United Kingdom Netherlands since 1900 World War II Charter for the Kingdom of the Netherlands Geography Birds Cities Delta Works Earthquakes Extreme points Flood control Geography Islands Lakes Mammals Mountains and hills Regions, Subregions Rivers Rhine–Meuse–Scheldt delta Volcanoes Zuiderzee Works Politics Administrative divisions municipalities provinces Current cabinet Constitution Elections Foreign relations Human rights LGBT Law enforcement Monarch States General (parliament) Senate House of Representatives Political parties Prime Minister Military Water boards Economy AEX index Central bank Energy Euronext Polder model Taxation Telecommunications Tourism Trade unions Transport Society Demographics Drug policy Immigration Education Health care Languages Culture Architecture Art Cinema Cuisine Customs and etiquette Language Literature Media Music People Netherlands names Public holidays Religion Sport Symbols Outline Category Portal WikiProject Dutch Wikisource has original text related to this article: Statuut voor het Koninkrijk der Nederlanden Website of the Dutch ministry of Internal Affairs Charter for the Kingdom of the Netherlands Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Charter_for_the_Kingdom_of_the_Netherlands&oldid=665950295" Categories: Politics of the Kingdom of the Netherlands Government of the Kingdom of the Netherlands Hidden categories: CS1 Dutch-language sources (nl) Articles needing additional references from December 2014 All articles needing additional references Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Article Talk Variants Views Read Edit View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Featured content Current events Random article Donate to Wikipedia Wikipedia store Interaction Help About Wikipedia Community portal Recent changes Contact page Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Cite this page Print/export Create a book Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Languages العربية Eesti Esperanto Français Bahasa Indonesia Nederlands Papiamentu Русский Edit links This page was last modified on 7 June 2015, at 22:09. Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view