Human rights in the Netherlands - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Human rights in the Netherlands From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to: navigation, search Kingdom of the Netherlands This article is part of a series on the politics and government of the Netherlands Constitution Charter Wet Algemene Bepalingen Human rights Monarchy King Willem-Alexander Council of Ministers Ministers Plenipotentiary Aruba Curaçao St. Maarten Cabinet Prime Minister (list) Mark Rutte Deputy Prime Minister Lodewijk Asscher Cabinet (list) Current cabinet (69th / Rutte 2) States General Senate President: Ankie Broekers-Knol Current membership Historic composition House of Representatives Speaker: vacant Current membership Historic composition Parliamentary committees Judiciary Supreme Court High Councils of State Council of State Court of Audit National Ombudsman Elections Recent elections General: 2006 2010 2012 Provincial: 2007 2011 2015 Municipal: 2006 2010 2014 European: 2004 2009 2014 Referendums Referendums: 2005 2016 Political parties Politicians Local government Provincial politics Water boards Municipal politics BES islands Foreign relations Diplomatic missions of the Netherlands to the Netherlands Related topics Law of the Netherlands Social Economic Council Central Bank Contemporary history Other countries Atlas Politics portal v t e The human rights of the Netherlands are codified in the Dutch constitution. Together with other European states, the Netherlands is often at or near the head in international civil liberties and political rights rankings.[1] Contents 1 Constitutional rights 2 Practice 2.1 Human trafficking 3 Torture and ill treatment 3.1 Police brutality 4 House visit controversy 5 International law 6 See also 7 References Constitutional rights[edit] The first chapter of the Dutch constitution codifies the rights of all inhabitants of the Netherlands. These are both negative and positive rights as well as democratic rights. This includes a ban on discrimination (the first article of the Netherlands), the freedom of religion, freedom of speech, freedom of association and freedom of assembly and the right to privacy. These are limitations on government, which citizens can enforce these classical civil rights directly at the judge. Additionally there are social rights such as the right to housing, social security, health care, education and employment. These are duties of the government towards its citizens, but these cannot be enforced by a judge. Democratic rights include the passive and active right to vote. The Netherlands has banned capital punishment during peace time and war time. The Ministry of the Interior and Kingdom Relations is responsible for the constitution. In the Netherlands there are still some legacy laws conflicting with the freedom of speech. Lèse-majesté and Blasphemy law (amongst others), the latter was officially abolished on February 1, 2014.[2] The Netherlands is signatory to all relevant international human rights instruments such as European Convention on Human Rights, Rome Statute (for the International Criminal Court) and the Universal Declaration on Human Rights, European Convention on Torture and the European Social Charter. Practice[edit] Several institutions are involved in the protection of classical human rights, in addition to the Supreme Court, the Commission Equal Treatment (non-discrimination), the Board Protection Personal Information (privacy) and the National Ombudsman. In 2007 Amnesty International criticised the Dutch government of several human rights issues, including war crimes in the Iraq war, the treatment of alleged terrorists and the detention of migrants, especially children and an incident surrounding a fire in an asylum seeker detention centre.[3] In 2005 The US Department of State observed several problems with human rights such as the societal discrimination and violence against religious and ethnic minorities, especially after the murder of Theo van Gogh and the human trafficking in women and girls for sexual exploitation.[4] Human trafficking[edit] Main article: Human trafficking in the Netherlands Human trafficking is a widely recognised problem. The Netherlands is listed by the UNODC as a top destination for victims of human trafficking.[5] In the Netherlands, it is estimated that there are from 1,000 to 7,000 trafficking victims a year. Most police investigations relate to legal sex businesses, with all sectors of prostitution being well represented, but with window brothels being particularly overrepresented. [6][7][8] In 2008, there were 809 registered trafficking victims, 763 were women and at least 60 percent of them were forced to work in the sex industry. All victims from Hungary were female and were forced into prostitution.[9] [10] Out of all Amsterdam's 8,000 to 11,000 prostitutes, more than 75% are from Eastern Europe, Africa and Asia, according to a former prostitute who produced a report about the sex trade in Amsterdam, in 2008.[11] An article in Le Monde in 1997 found that 80% of prostitutes in the Netherlands were foreigners and 70% had no immigration papers.[12][13] In 2000, the Netherlands established the Dutch National Rapporteur on Trafficking in Human Beings and Sexual Violence against Children to report on the progress of the Dutch Government in combating human trafficking, which produced its first report in 2002.[14] Torture and ill treatment[edit] According to the Council of Europe anti-torture Committee, there were several violations of human rights committed by Dutch officials.[15] Police brutality[edit] In 2009, two police officers from Bleiswijk approached a homeless man sleeping on the grass in a town park, detained him, and drove him away to a place north of Moerkapelle. They then told him to dig his own grave, whilst threatening him with guns. The homeless man was left there. The incident came up only because one of the policemen has reported the incident to his superior. Both policemen were discharged and sentenced to six months in prison.[16][17] House visit controversy[edit] People on welfare in the Netherlands can get a house visit by inspectors without any concrete suspicion of fraud required. Because forcing entry would be in conflict with the right to privacy, the citizen in question is asked permission to enter. However, if entry is denied, they can be cut on their income. [18] It is not accepted for the residents to make video recordings of this event in their own home. A significant large part of the Dutch population is potentially exposed these privacy invasive measures as they do not only apply to people on unemployment welfare but other benefits as well. International law[edit] The Netherlands hosts several international human rights institutions. The Hague is home to the International Criminal Court, the Yugoslavia Tribunal, the International Court of Justice, Rwanda Tribunal. See also[edit] Constitution of the Netherlands Law of the Netherlands References[edit] General Human Rights Watch webpage on the Netherlands Amnesty International Netherlands 2007 U.S. Department of State Country Report on Human Rights Practices on the Netherlands, 2005 IFEX: Freedom of expression in Netherlands Privacy International: Privacy and Human Rights 2003: Netherlands human rights policy of the Dutch Ministry of Foreign Affairs human rights policy of the Dutch Ministry of the Interior and Kingdom Relations Review of the Netherlands by the United Nations Human Rights Council's Universal Periodic Review, April 15, 2008 Specific ^ See Freedom House ranking, 2005. Switzerland received the highest possible grade, 1, in both political rights and civil liberties. See also the Netherlands' entry in List of indices of freedom. ^ Wet van 23 januari 2014 tot wijziging van het Wetboek van Strafrecht in verband met het laten vervallen van het verbod op godslastering, Stb. 2014, 39. (Law of January 23, 2014 to amend the Criminal Code in connection with the abolishment of the ban on blasphemy) ^ Amnesty International report for 2007 ^ report of the Department of State for 2005 ^ "UN highlights human trafficking". BBC. March 26, 2007.  ^ [1] ^ [2] ^ [3] ^ [4] ^ [5] ^ Timesonline.co.uk ^ [6] ^ [7] ^ Margaret Melrose; Jenny Pearce (2013). Critical Perspectives on Child Sexual Exploitation and Related Trafficking. Palgrave Macmillan. p. 151. ISBN 9781137294104.  ^ http://www.cpt.coe.int/documents/nld/2011-10-28-eng.htm ^ http://www.camilleri.nl/2010/08/agenten-opgepakt-na-vrijheidsberoving/ ^ http://fakty.interia.pl/swiat/news-rmf24-zostali-skazani-za-znecanie-sie-nad-polakiem-jest-odwo,nId,1086166 ^ Welfare house visits v t e Netherlands articles Part of the Kingdom of the Netherlands History Prehistory Iron age Germanic tribes Roman Era Frisii, Chamavi, Batavi, Cananefates Migration Period Saxons, Frisians, Franks Dorestad, Utrecht Development urban centers Frisian Kingdom Frankish Kingdom Middle Francia Lower Lorraine Flanders, Holland, Frisian Freedom Brabant, Guelders Holy Roman Empire Burgundian Netherlands Habsburg Netherlands Renaissance Seventeen Provinces Spanish Netherlands Eighty Years' War Dutch Republic Golden Age Batavian Revolution Batavian Republic Kingdom of Holland First French Empire Principality United Kingdom Netherlands since 1900 World War II Charter for the Kingdom of the Netherlands Geography Birds Cities Delta Works Earthquakes Extreme points Flood control Geography Islands Lakes Mammals Mountains and hills Regions, Subregions Rivers Rhine–Meuse–Scheldt delta Volcanoes Zuiderzee Works Politics Administrative divisions municipalities provinces Current cabinet Constitution Elections Foreign relations Human rights LGBT Law enforcement Monarch States General (parliament) Senate House of Representatives Political parties Prime Minister Military Water boards Economy AEX index Central bank Energy Euronext Polder model Taxation Telecommunications Tourism Trade unions Transport Society Demographics Drug policy Immigration Education Health care Languages Culture Architecture Art Cinema Cuisine Customs and etiquette Language Literature Media Music People Netherlands names Public holidays Religion Sport Symbols Outline Category Portal WikiProject v t e Human rights in Europe Sovereign states Albania Andorra Armenia Austria Azerbaijan Belarus Belgium Bosnia and Herzegovina Bulgaria Croatia Cyprus Czech Republic Denmark Estonia Finland France Georgia Germany Greece Hungary Iceland Ireland Italy Kazakhstan Latvia Liechtenstein Lithuania Luxembourg Macedonia Malta Moldova Monaco Montenegro Netherlands Norway Poland Portugal Romania Russia San Marino Serbia Slovakia Slovenia Spain Sweden Switzerland Turkey Ukraine United Kingdom States with limited recognition Abkhazia Kosovo Nagorno-Karabakh Republic Northern Cyprus South Ossetia Transnistria Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Human_rights_in_the_Netherlands&oldid=707228142" Categories: Human rights in the Netherlands Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Article Talk Variants Views Read Edit View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Featured content Current events Random article Donate to Wikipedia Wikipedia store Interaction Help About Wikipedia Community portal Recent changes Contact page Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Cite this page Print/export Create a book Download as PDF Printable version Languages العربية Edit links This page was last modified on 27 February 2016, at 16:31. Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view