Melbourne City Centre - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Melbourne City Centre From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to: navigation, search This article is about the locality within the postcodes 3000, 3004 and 3006[citation needed] of Melbourne in Victoria, Australia, officially known as "Melbourne". For the Greater Melbourne metropolitan area, see Melbourne. For the local government area that envelopes the locality, as well as some inner suburbs, see City of Melbourne. City Centre Melbourne, Victoria CBD of Melbourne as viewed from Eureka Tower Population 28,371 (Suburb, 2011)[1]  • Density 4,580/km2 (11,850/sq mi) Established 1835 Postcode(s) 3000, 3002[citation needed], 3004, 3006[citation needed] Area 6.2 km2 (2.4 sq mi) LGA(s) City of Melbourne City of Port Phillip State electorate(s) Albert Park Melbourne Prahran Federal Division(s) Melbourne Melbourne Ports Localities around City Centre: North Melbourne Carlton / Parkville Fitzroy Docklands City Centre East Melbourne Port Melbourne Southbank / South Wharf St Kilda Rd / South Yarra Melbourne City Centre (sometimes referred to as "Central City",[2] and colloquially known as simply "The City") is an area of Melbourne, Victoria, Australia. It is the area in which Melbourne was established in 1835, by John Batman and John Pascoe Fawkner,[3] and its boundaries are defined by the Government of Victoria's Melbourne Planning Scheme.[4] Today it comprises the two oldest areas of Melbourne; the Hoddle Grid and Queen Victoria Market, as well as sections of the redeveloped areas of Docklands and Southbank/Wharf.[4] It is not to be confused with the larger local government area of the City of Melbourne. It is the core central activities district (CAD) of Melbourne's inner suburbs and the major central business district (CBD) of Greater Melbourne's metropolitan area, and is a major financial centre in Australia and the Asia-Pacific region. The Hoddle Grid in the City Centre is home to Melbourne's famed alleyways and arcades and is renowned for its distinct blend of contemporary and Victorian architecture as well as expansive parks and gardens which surround its edges.[5] The City Centre is home to five of the six tallest buildings in Australia. In recent times, it has been placed alongside New York City and Berlin as one of the world's great street art meccas, and designated a "City of Literature" by UNESCO in its Creative Cities Network.[6] Contents 1 Foundation 1.1 Batman's Treaty 1.2 Fawkner's fait accompli 2 Boundaries and geography 2.1 Hoddle Grid 3 Demographics 4 Economy 5 Culture and sport 5.1 Arts 5.2 Sports 5.3 Events 6 Transport 7 References 8 External links Foundation[edit] Main article: Foundation of Melbourne Further information: History of Melbourne Artist's impression of the signing of Batman's Treaty Batman's Treaty[edit] In April 1835, John Batman, a prominent grazier and a member of the Geelong and Dutigalla Association (later Port Phillip Association),[7][8] sailed from Launceston on the island of Van Diemen's Land (now the State of Tasmania), aboard the schooner Rebecca, in search of fresh grazing land in the south-east of the Colony of New South Wales (the mainland Australian continent). He sailed across Bass Strait, into the bay of Port Phillip, and arrived at the mouth of the Yarra River in May.[9] After exploring the surrounding area, he met with the elders of the indigenous Aboriginal group, the Wurundjeri of the Kulin nation alliance, and negotiated a transaction for 600,000 acres (2,400 km²; 940 mi²) which later became known as Batman's Treaty.[10] The transaction, which is believed to have taken place on the bank of Merri Creek (near the modern day suburb of Northcote),[11] consisted of an offering of: blankets, knives, mirrors, sugar, and other such items; to be also tributed annually to the Wurundjeri.[10] The last sentence of Batman's journal entry on this day became famous as the founding charter of the settlement.[7] "So the boat went up the large river. And, I am glad to state about six miles up found the river all good water and very deep. This will be the place for a village." — Journal of John Batman (8 June 1835).[9] Upon returning to Van Diemen's Land, Batman's treaty was deemed invalid by the Governor of New South Wales, Sir Richard Bourke, under the Proclamation of Governor Bourke in August 1835.[12] It was the belief of Governor Bourke, as well as the Governor of Van Diemen's Land, Sir George Arthur, that the Aboriginal people did not have any official claims to the lands of the Australian continent. The proclamation formally declared, under the doctrine of terra nullius, that The Crown owned the whole of the Australian continent and that only it alone could sell and distribute land.[12] It therefore voided any contracts or treaties made without the consent of the government, and declared any person attempting to rely on such a treaty to be trespassing.[12] However, at the time the proclamation was being drawn up, a prominent businessman from Van Diemen's Land, John Pascoe Fawkner, had also funded an expedition to the area; which sailed from George Town aboard the schooner Enterprize.[13] At the same time, the Port Phillip Association had also funded a second expedition; which sailed from Launceston aboard the Rebecca.[7] John Pascoe Fawkner Fawkner's fait accompli[edit] The settlement party aboard the Enterprize entered the Yarra River, and anchored close to the site chosen by Batman, on 29 August.[14] The party went ashore the following day (near what is today William Street; and is now celebrated as Melbourne Day) and landed their stores, livestock and began to construct the settlement.[13] The Association party aboard the Rebecca arrived in September after spending time at a temporary camp at Indented Head, where they encountered William Buckley – an escaped convict, believed dead, who had been living for 32 years with the indigenous Aboriginal group, the Wathaurong of the Kulin nation alliance.[15] Batman was dismayed to discover the settlers of the Enterprize had established a settlement in the area and informed the settlers that they were trespassing on the Association's land. However, according to the Proclamation of Governor Bourke, both the parties were in fact trespassing on Crown land.[12] When Fawkner (who was noted for his democratic nature)[13] arrived in October, and following tense arguments between the two parties, negotiation were made for land to be shared equally. As Fawkner had arrived after the two parties, he was aware of the Proclamation of Governor Bourke, which had gained approval from the Colonial Office in October.[12] He knew that cooperation would be vital if the settlement was to continue to exist fait accompli. Land was then divided, and the settlement existed peacefully, but without a formal system of governance.[14] It was referred to by a number of names, including: "Batmania" and "Bearbrass"[9][16] of which the latter was agreed upon by Batman and Fawkner.[16] Fawkner assumed a leading role in the establishment of Bearbrass;[13] which, by early 1836, consisted of 177 European settlers (142 male and 35 female settlers).[14] The Secretary of State for the Colonies, Charles Grant, recognised the settlement's fait accompli that same year, and authorised Governor Bourke to transfer Bearbrass to a Crown settlement.[14] Batman and the Port Phillip Association were compensated £7,000 for the land.[7] And, in March 1837, it was officially renamed "Melbourne" by Governor Bourke in honour of the British Prime Minister of the day, William Lamb (the Lord Melbourne).[14] Boundaries and geography[edit] The Melbourne central business district, 1903 Map of Melbourne City Centre The City Centre is bordered by Spencer Street to the west and extends north as far as Grattan Street which borders Carlton. The border extends along La Trobe Street, William Street, Peel Street, Grattan Street, taking in the Queen Victoria Market, Berkeley Street, Victoria Street. To the east it is bordered by Spring Street, however the area extends east to take in parts of Wellington Parade, Brunton Avenue, Punt Road and the Yarra River. It borders South Yarra to the south east at Anderson Street, Domain Road, Domain Street, Arnold Street, Fawkner Park, Commercial Road, High Street. It also borders both St Kilda along St Kilda Road and Albert Park along Queens Road, Lakeside Drive and South Melbourne along Albert Road, Kings Way, Palmerston Crescent, Wells Place and finally Southbank along St Kilda Road and the south side of Flinders Street (Northbank) which includes Flinders Street Station and the Melbourne Aquarium. Although these are the borders on official maps, there are several adjoining areas that function as part of the Central Activities District. This includes Melbourne Docklands (with Docklands Stadium), Southbank, South Wharf and East Melbourne/Jolimont (with the Melbourne Cricket Ground). Despite the area being described as the centre, it is neither the geographic or demographic centre of Melbourne, due to an urban sprawl to the south east; the geographic centre is currently[when?] located at Bourne Street, Glen Iris.[17] Hoddle Grid[edit] Main article: Hoddle Grid Aerial of the southern area of Melbourne's CBD. The far right of the image is Flinders Street Station and the Yarra River. The Hoddle Grid is the layout of the streets in the centre of the original Melbourne City Centre. The grid was laid out in 1837 by Robert Hoddle. All major streets are one and half chains (99 ft or 30 m) in width, while all blocks are exactly 10 chains square (10 acres, 201 m × 201 m). It is one mile (1.6 km) long by half a mile wide (0.80 km). The grid's longest axis is oriented 70 degrees clockwise from true north, to align better with the course of the Yarra River. The majority of Melbourne is oriented at 8 degrees clockwise from true north–noting that magnetic north was 8° 3' E in 1900, increasing to 11° 42' E in 2009.[18] It covers the area from Flinders Street to Queen Victoria Market, and from Spencer Street to Spring Street. A public underground toilet on Queen Street From the 1870s to 1920s, the central part of Melbourne was home to mostly medical professionals who had established practices along Collins Street and Spring Street.[19] Before the 1960s, only a handful of permanent residents lived in the Spring Street area and St Kilda Road. The area was largely unpopular for residents and Council policies did not permit development of apartment style housing in the area. St Kilda Road was annexed in the 1960s and given the postcode of Melbourne 3004 to stimulate office development along the strip and reduce pressure on overdevelopment of the Hoddle Grid. The result was the demolition of many of the street's grand mansions. Demographics[edit] Central Melbourne has one of the fastest growing residential populations in Australia. Residents of the city centre are of mixed social status.[20] On one hand, living in the centre of the city offers proximity to work and the best access to public transport. On the other hand, there are many strata titled studio apartments that have no carparks and limited space. As a result, there is a mix of students and young urban professionals living in the locality of Melbourne, with a relatively low car dependency. Economy[edit] Eureka Tower and Crown Casino at Southbank The City Centre is the core central activities district (CAD) of Melbourne's inner suburbs. It encompasses a number of places of significance, which include the Australian Centre for the Moving Image, Crown Casino, Federation Square, Flinders Street Station, Melbourne Aquarium, Melbourne Convention and Exhibition Centre, Melbourne Town Hall, National Gallery of Victoria, State Arts Centre of Victoria, State Library of Victoria, State Parliament of Victoria and Supreme Court of Victoria. Bordering its north-east perimeter is the World Heritage-listed Royal Exhibition Building and Carlton Gardens as well as the Melbourne Museum. It is also the main terminus for the Melbourne metropolitan and Victorian regional passenger rail networks - being Flinders Street and Southern Cross stations respectively, as well as the most dense section of the Melbourne tram network. Town Hall administration buildings The City Centre is the major central business district (CBD) of Greater Melbourne's metropolitan area, and a major financial centre in Australia and the Asia-Pacific region.[21] It is home to the corporate headquarters of the World's two largest mining companies: BHP Billiton and Rio Tinto Group; as well as two of Australia's "big four" banks: ANZ and NAB, its two largest gaming companies: Crown and Tabcorp, largest telecommunications company Telstra, two largest transport management companies: Toll and Transurban and the iconic brewing company Foster's Group. It also serves as the main administrative centre for the City of Melbourne as well as the State Government of Victoria – the latter with the suburb of East Melbourne. Three universities have major campuses in the area: Royal Melbourne Institute of Technology (RMIT City campus), University of Melbourne (Victorian College of the Arts) and Victoria University (Flinders campus). Melbourne City Centre, compared with other Australian cities, has comparatively unrestricted height limits and as a result of waves of post-war development contains five of the six tallest buildings in Australia, the tallest of which is the Eureka Tower, situated in Southbank. It has an observation deck near the top from where you can see above all of Melbourne's structures.[22] The Rialto tower, the city's second tallest, remains the tallest building in the old CBD; its observation deck for visitors closed in December 2009.[23] Culture and sport[edit] Princess Theatre on Spring Street Olderfleet buildings, Collins Street Aerial view of the Melbourne Cricket Ground (MCG), located at Melbourne Park, which also houses Rod Laver Arena and the Hisense Arena (sports & entertainment). Arts[edit] Further information: List of theatres in the Melbourne City Centre Notable theatres and performance venues in the City Centre include the Victorian Arts Centre (which includes the State Theatre, Hamer Hall, the Playhouse and the Fairfax Studio), Melbourne Recital Centre, Sidney Myer Music Bowl, Princess Theatre, Regent Theatre, Forum Theatre, Palace Theatre, Comedy Theatre, Athenaeum Theatre, Her Majesty's Theatre, Capitol Theatre, Palais Theatre and the Australian Centre for Contemporary Art. It is also the literary centre of Australia, and has more bookshops and publishing companies per capita than any other city in Australia, and includes the headquarters of the World's largest travel guidebook publisher Lonely Planet. In 2008, it was designated a "City of Literature" by UNESCO in its Creative Cities Network.[6] Melbourne has been placed alongside New York and Berlin as one of the world's great street art meccas,[24] and its extensive street art-laden laneways, alleys and arcades were voted by Lonely Planet readers as Australia's top cultural attraction.[25] Sports[edit] Most professional sporting clubs represent Greater Melbourne (e.g. Melbourne Victory, Melbourne Storm). An exception is the Melbourne Cricket Club and Melbourne Football Club (its offshoot), both based at the Melbourne Cricket Ground which was built in Jolimont, adjacent to the city but a locality of the suburb of East Melbourne. Both were the first clubs of their respective sports and established in a time when the city's population was still very small and limited to a handful of inner suburbs. As a result, the Melbourne Cricket Club has a fairly exclusive membership, whilst the Melbourne Football Club, although bearing the name Melbourne, is associated by the supporters of other suburban clubs as representing the central suburb and perceive its supporters to represent the locality and not the entire city.[26] As a result, despite its rich tradition and early success, it is one of the least supported clubs in the VFL/AFL. The lack of identity resulted in a push for the Melbourne Hawks, which was stopped by intervention from Joseph Gutnick and the majority of the Hawthorn Football Club members. It has had intense rivalries with younger clubs from the adjacent inner suburbs such as the Collingwood Football Club and early inter-town rival Geelong Football Club. The Melbourne Football Club has recently made efforts to shed its suburban tag and be embraced by the whole metropolitan area.[27] In line with this, the club recently employed strategies such as establishing Team Melbourne, (a group of sporting teams which bear the name "Melbourne"), and a strategy for promoting the brand as representing the city in China through club supporter and former Lord Mayor John So. Golf is played at the course of the Albert Park Golf Club on Queens Road.[28] Events[edit] The City Centre has hosted a number of events of significance, which include: the 1901 inauguration of the Government of Australia, 1956 Summer Olympic Games, 1981 Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting, 1995 World Police and Fire Games, 2000 World Economic Forum, 2006 Commonwealth Games, 2015 Cricket World Cup and G20 Ministerial Meeting - among others. It is also recognised for the substantial number of cultural and sports events and festivals it holds annually – many being the largest in Australia and the World. Transport[edit] Main article: Transport in Melbourne A C2 tram on Bourke Street Flinders Street Station across the Yarra River The Melbourne City Centre is the transport hub of the city. The city is serviced by five railway stations as part of the Melbourne Underground Rail Loop: Flinders Street (the busiest), Southern Cross Station (the hub of the regional network in Spencer Street at Melbourne Docklands) also an interstate terminal, and three underground stations - Parliament, Melbourne Central and Flagstaff (not open on weekends) stations. Flinders Street Station is also the hub for Melbourne's suburban train network. Trams run down the main streets Flinders, Collins, Bourke and Latrobe as well as Spencer Street, Market Street, Elizabeth Street, Swanston Street, Spring Street, Swan Street and St Kilda Road. There are several large accessibility tram superstops located in Flinders Street, Collins Street, Swanston Street and Bourke Street Mall. The city is also well connected by bus services, with majority of buses running down Lonsdale Street. Major bus stops include Melbourne Central and QV. Most bus routes service suburbs north and east of the city given the lack of train lines to these areas. Major bicycle trails lead to the CBD and a main bicycle path down Swanston Street. Ferries dock along the northbank of the Yarra at Federation Wharf and the turning basin at the Aquatic Centre. There is also a water taxi service to Melbourne and Olympic Parks. References[edit] Notes: ^ Australian Bureau of Statistics (31 October 2012). "Melbourne (Urban Centre/Locality)". 2011 Census QuickStats. Retrieved 2013-07-14.  ^ Government of Victoria 2009, p. 1, clause 21.08-1 ^ Melbourne City Council 1997, p. 8 ^ a b Government of Victoria 2009, p. 3, figure 12: Central City ^ Diamonstein, Barbaralee (9 August 1987), "Victorian Scenes on a Melbourne Walk", New York Times, The New York Times Company, retrieved: 5 August 2011 ^ a b "Melbourne, Australia: City of Literature", Creative Cities Network, UNESCO, retrieved: 10 August 2011 ^ a b c d Serle, Percival (1949). "Batman, John". Dictionary of Australian Biography. Sydney: Angus and Robertson. Retrieved 2009-09-25.  ^ "Port Phillip Association" (Web). Encyclopædia Britannica. 2009. Retrieved 2009-09-25.  ^ a b c "Journal of John Batman" (Web). State Library of Victoria. Retrieved 2009-09-25.  ^ a b "The Deed" (Web). Batmania. National Museum of Australia. Retrieved 2009-09-25.  ^ Ellender, Isabel; Christiansen, Peter (2001). People of the Merri Merri. The Wurundjeri in Colonial Days. Melbourne: Merri Creek Management Committee. ISBN 0-9577728-0-7.  ^ a b c d e "Governor Bourke's Proclamation 1835" (Web). Documenting Democracy. National Archives of Australia. Retrieved 2009-09-25.  ^ a b c d Serle, Percival (1949). "Fawkner, John Pascoe". Dictionary of Australian Biography. Sydney: Angus and Robertson. Retrieved 2009-09-25.  ^ a b c d e "Foundation of the Settlement" (PDF). History of the City of Melbourne. City of Melbourne. 1997. pp. 8–10. Archived from the original (PDF) on 22 September 2009. Retrieved 2009-09-25.  ^ Morgan, John (1852). The Life and Times of William Buckley (Web). Hobart: Archibald MacDougall. p. 116. Retrieved 2009-09-25.  ^ a b Reed, Alexander Wyclif (1973). Place names of Australia. Sydney: Reed. p. 149. ISBN 0-589-50128-3.  ^ Glen Iris still the heart of city's sprawl, The Age, 5 August 2002 ^ Magnetic Declination ^ Collins Street from the City of Melbourne ^ City of Melbourne - Research - Who lives in the city? ^ Friedman, John (1997), "Cities Unbound: The Intercity Network in the Asia-Pacific Region", Management of Social Transformations, UNESCO, retrieved: 5 August 2011 ^ "Eureka Tower". Eureka Tower Official. Archived from the original on 18 July 2008. Retrieved 29 September 2008.  ^ Dobbin, Marika (8 October 2009). "End in view for Rialto's top deck". The Age (Melbourne). Retrieved 8 February 2010.  ^ Allen, Jessica. The World’s Best Cities for Viewing Street Art[dead link], International Business Times (2010). Retrieved 16 October 2010. ^ Topsfield, Jewel. Brumby slams Tourism Victoria over graffiti promotion, The Age (2008). Retrieved 16 October 2010. ^ Melbourne Demons - The rust bucket of Australia from ConvictCreations.com ^ A new base for Demons? from the Age ^ Golf Select, Albert Park, retrieved 2009-05-11  Texts: Government of Victoria (2009), Melbourne Planning Scheme, Department of Planning and Community Development  (PDF version), retrieved: 5 August 2011 Melbourne City Council (1997), The History of the City of Melbourne, Melbourne City Records and Archives Branch  (PDF version), retrieved: 5 August 2011 External links[edit] Wikivoyage has a travel guide for Melbourne/City Centre. Melbourne portal Official tourism website Local history of Melbourne CBD Melbourne City Centre is at coordinates 37°49′05″S 144°58′34″E﻿ / ﻿37.818°S 144.976°E﻿ / -37.818; 144.976Coordinates: 37°49′05″S 144°58′34″E﻿ / ﻿37.818°S 144.976°E﻿ / -37.818; 144.976 Wikimedia Commons has media related to Central Business District, Melbourne. v t e Streets of Melbourne's Hoddle Grid Latitudinal streets West to East: Spencer King William Market Queen Elizabeth Swanston Russell Exhibition Spring Longitudinal streets South to North: Flinders Flinders Lane Collins Little Collins Bourke Little Bourke Lonsdale Little Lonsdale La Trobe Significant lanes Lanes of Melbourne ACDC Lane Bank Place Bligh Place Block Place Caledonian Lane Causeway Lane Centre Place Degraves Street Hardware Lane Niagara Lane Manchester Lane McKillop Street Punch Lane Significant arcades Arcades of Melbourne Block Arcade Campbell Arcade Cathedral Arcade Centreway Arcade Howey Place Melbourne GPO Port Phillip Arcade Royal Arcade v t e Landmarks in the Melbourne City Centre Note: this includes landmarks in the Melbourne City Centre and its fringe areas, not the Greater Melbourne metropolitan area City precincts Arts Precinct Chinatown Docklands Government Precinct Greek Precinct Little Italy Paris End RMIT City Southbank/Wharf Sports and Entertainment Precinct University of Melbourne Shopping Block Arcade Bourke Street Bridge Road Brunswick Street Chapel Street Centre Place Collins Street Degraves Street DFO South Wharf Elizabeth Street Flinders Lane GPO Melbourne Harbour Town Docklands Little Collins Street Melbourne Central Shopping Centre Myer Emporium Pran Central Queen Victoria Market Queen Victoria Village Royal Arcade Swanston Street Entertainment Tramcar Restaurant Crown Casino and Entertainment Complex Luna Park Melbourne Aquarium Melbourne Visitor Shuttle Melbourne Zoo See also: Theatres in the Melbourne City Centre Public galleries Australian Centre for Contemporary Art Australian Centre for the Moving Image Ian Potter Museum of Art NGV Australia NGV International RMIT Gallery See also: Museums in Melbourne Institutions General Post Office Government House Melbourne Observatory Melbourne Town Hall Old Melbourne Gaol Old Melbourne Magistrates' Court Old Melbourne Mint Old Treasury Building Parliament House State Library of Victoria Supreme Court of Victoria Victoria Barracks Structures Arts Centre Eureka Tower Melbourne Convention and Exhibition Centre Melbourne Star Royal Exhibition Building Shrine of Remembrance St Paul's Cathedral St Patrick's Cathedral Sports stadiums Melbourne Rectangular Stadium (AAMI Park) Docklands Stadium (Etihad Stadium) Flemington Racecourse Margaret Court Arena Melbourne Multi Purpose Venue (Hisense Arena) Melbourne Cricket Ground (MCG) Melbourne Grand Prix Circuit Melbourne Sports and Aquatic Centre (MSAC) Lakeside Stadium National Ice Sports Centre (O'Brien Group Arena) Olympic Park Stadium Rod Laver Arena Royal Melbourne Golf Club Princes Park (Ikon Park) Parks and spaces Albert Park and Lake Alexandra Gardens Birrarung Marr Carlton Gardens City Square Federation Square Fitzroy Gardens Flagstaff Gardens Kings Domain Queen Victoria Gardens Royal Botanic Gardens Royal Park Treasury Gardens Yarra Park Transport Bolte Bridge Capital City Trail City Circle Tram CityLink Flinders Street station Melbourne Airport Melbourne Central station Melbourne Seaport Southern Cross station Trams in Melbourne West Gate Bridge Yarra River See also: Museums in Melbourne Parks and gardens of Melbourne Theatres in the Melbourne City Centre v t e Capital city central business districts of Australia     Sydney CBD Melbourne CBD Brisbane CBD Adelaide CBD Perth CBD Hobart CBD Darwin CBD Canberra CBD v t e Events in the Melbourne City Centre Note: this includes events held in the Melbourne City Centre and its fringe areas, not the Greater Melbourne metropolitan area Summer All: Summer Fun in the City of Melbourne December: Australian Dancesport Championships Boxing Day Test Carols by Candlelight Myer Christmas Parade January: Australian Open Midsumma Festival Melbourne International Boat Show One Day International Cricket February: St Kilda Festival Herald Sun Tour White Night festivals Autumn March: Australian Grand Prix Melbourne Fashion Festival Melbourne Food and Wine Festival Moomba Waterfest Melbourne Queer Film Festival April: ANZAC Day parade AFL ANZAC Day clash Logie Awards Melbourne International Comedy Festival Melbourne International Flower and Garden Show Melbourne International Jazz Festival May: Melbourne Jazz Fringe Festival Logie Awards Winter All: Melbourne Winter Masterpieces series June: AFL Queen's Birthday clash Melbourne International Animation Festival Australian International Motor Show July: State of Design Festival Melbourne International Film Festival Open House Melbourne Run Melbourne August: Melbourne Day Melbourne Underground Film Festival Melbourne Writers Festival Manifest Craft Cubed Spring September: AFL Grand Final Melbourne Fringe Festival Melbourne International Festival of Brass Royal Melbourne Show Melbourne Spring Fashion Week October: Around the Bay in a Day Melbourne Festival Melbourne Marathon Festival Melbourne Spring Racing Carnival November: Head of the Yarra Melbourne Cup Carnival City2Sea v t e Melbourne's public transport - PTV Modes and network Trains (stations) Trams (routes) Buses (routes) - SmartBus Night Network Ticketing myki Metropolitan rail operators Metro Trains Melbourne (heavy rail) Keolis Downer - Yarra Trams (tram/light rail) Regional rail operators V/Line (heavy rail) Metropolitan and regional bus operators Broadmeadows Bus Service Cardinia Transit CDC Melbourne Cranbourne Transit Dyson's Bus Services East West Bus Company Grenda's Bus Services Invicta Bus Services Ivanhoe Bus Company Kastoria Bus Lines Martyrs Bus Service McKenzie's Tourist Services Moonee Valley Coaches Moorabbin Transit Moreland Buslines Panorama Coaches Peninsula Bus Lines Portsea Passenger Service Reservoir Bus Company Ryan Brothers Bus Service Sita Buslines Skybus Super Shuttle Sunbury Bus Service Transdev Melbourne Tullamarine Bus Lines US Bus Lines Ventura Bus Lines Planned infrastructure Melbourne Metro Regional Rail Link Proposed rail extensions Proposed tram extensions Authorities Department of Transport Level Crossing Removal Authority Public Transport Victoria v t e Trams in Melbourne - Yarra Trams Routes 1 3/3a 5 6 8 11 12 16 19 30 City Circle (35) 48 55 57 59 64 67 70 72 75 78 82 86 96 109 Current Tram Fleet W Z A B C C2 D E Operator Keolis Downer (Yarra Trams) Former operators Tramway trusts Prahran and Malvern Hawthorn Melbourne, Brunswick and Coburg Fitzroy, Northcote and Preston Footscray Private operators Northcote Municipality Cable Tramways (cable era) North Melbourne Electric Tramway and Lighting Company Government owned Melbourne and Metropolitan Tramways Board Victorian Railways Metropolitan Transit Authority Public Transport Corporation Franchisees Melbourne Tramway and Omnibus Company (cable era) M>Tram Transdev TSL Tourist services City Circle Tram Colonial Tramcar Restaurant Tram depots Brunswick Camberwell East Preston Essendon Glenhuntly Kew Malvern Southbank Hawthorn Miscellaneous Classification system Preston Workshops Balaclava Junction Domain Interchange Melbourne University tram stop Moonee Ponds Junction St Kilda Junction Melbourne Cable Trams Hook turn Think Tram project Karachi Tram Tram museums Ballarat Tramway Museum Tramway Museum Society of Victoria Hawthorn tram depot Former tram routes 24 31 68 79 95 112 v t e Theatres in the Melbourne City Centre Note: this includes theatres in the Melbourne City Centre and its fringe areas, not the Greater Melbourne metropolitan area Athenaeum Theatre ACCA (Chunky Move Studio) Arts Centre (Fairfax Studio, Hamer Hall, Playhouse, State Theatre) Comedy Theatre Forum Theatre Her Majesty's Theatre La Mama Theatre Malthouse Theatre Melbourne Recital Centre Melbourne Town Hall National Theatre Palace Theatre Palais Theatre Princess Theatre Regent Theatre RMIT Capitol Theatre Sidney Myer Music Bowl Southbank Theatre v t e Museums of Melbourne ACCA ACMI ARHS Railway Museum Chinese Museum Cooks' Cottage Heide Museum of Modern Art Hellenic Museum Ian Potter Museum of Art Immigration Museum Islamic Museum Jewish Museum La Trobe's Cottage Maritime Museum Melbourne Museum Sports Museum NGV Australia NGV International Old Melbourne Gaol Old Treasury Building Scienceworks v t e Suburbs of the City of Melbourne, Melbourne, Victoria Carlton Carlton North Docklands East Melbourne Flemington Kensington Melbourne CBD North Melbourne Port Melbourne Parkville Southbank South Wharf South Yarra West Melbourne v t e Suburbs of the City of Port Phillip, Melbourne, Victoria Albert Park Balaclava Elwood Melbourne Middle Park Port Melbourne Ripponlea St Kilda St Kilda East St Kilda West Southbank South Melbourne South Wharf Windsor Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Melbourne_City_Centre&oldid=715671130" Categories: Landmarks in Melbourne Festivals in Melbourne Melbourne City Centre Central business districts in Australia Geography of Melbourne History of Melbourne Hidden categories: All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from August 2013 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from January 2015 Use dmy dates from August 2011 Use Australian English from August 2011 All Wikipedia articles written in Australian English Vague or ambiguous time from December 2011 Coordinates on Wikidata Commons category without a link on Wikidata Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Article Talk Variants Views Read Edit View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Featured content Current events Random article Donate to Wikipedia Wikipedia store Interaction Help About Wikipedia Community portal Recent changes Contact page Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Cite this page Print/export Create a book Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikivoyage Languages සිංහල Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links This page was last modified on 17 April 2016, at 08:03. Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view