Subset - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Subset From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to: navigation, search "Superset" redirects here. For other uses, see Superset (disambiguation). Euler diagram showing A is a proper subset of B and conversely B is a proper superset of A In mathematics, especially in set theory, a set A is a subset of a set B, or equivalently B is a superset of A, if A is "contained" inside B, that is, all elements of A are also elements of B. A and B may coincide. The relationship of one set being a subset of another is called inclusion or sometimes containment. The subset relation defines a partial order on sets. The algebra of subsets forms a Boolean algebra in which the subset relation is called inclusion. Contents 1 Definitions 2 Property 3 ⊂ and ⊃ symbols 4 Examples 5 Other properties of inclusion 6 See also 7 References 8 External links Definitions[edit] If A and B are sets and every element of A is also an element of B, then: A is a subset of (or is included in) B, denoted by , or equivalently B is a superset of (or includes) A, denoted by If A is a subset of B, but A is not equal to B (i.e. there exists at least one element of B which is not an element of A), then A is also a proper (or strict) subset of B; this is written as or equivalently B is a proper superset of A; this is written as For any set S, the inclusion relation ⊆ is a partial order on the set of all subsets of S (the power set of S) defined by . We may also partially order by reverse set inclusion by defining . When quantified, A ⊆ B is represented as: ∀x{x∈A → x∈B}.[1] Property[edit] A is a subset of (or is included in) B, denoted by , If and only if the cardinality of their intersection is equal to the cardinality of A. Formally: ⊂ and ⊃ symbols[edit] Some authors use the symbols ⊂ and ⊃ to indicate subset and superset respectively; that is, with the same meaning and instead of the symbols, ⊆ and ⊇.[2] So for example, for these authors, it is true of every set A that A ⊂ A. Other authors prefer to use the symbols ⊂ and ⊃ to indicate proper subset and superset, respectively, instead of ⊊ and ⊋.[3] This usage makes ⊆ and ⊂ analogous to the inequality symbols ≤ and <. For example, if x ≤ y then x may or may not equal y, but if x < y, then x may not equal y, and is less than y. Similarly, using the convention that ⊂ is proper subset, if A ⊆ B, then A may or may not equal B, but if A ⊂ B, then A definitely does not equal B. Examples[edit] The regular polygons form a subset of the polygons The set A = {1, 2} is a proper subset of B = {1, 2, 3}, thus both expressions A ⊆ B and A ⊊ B are true. The set D = {1, 2, 3} is a subset of E = {1, 2, 3}, thus D ⊆ E is true, and D ⊊ E is not true (false). Any set is a subset of itself, but not a proper subset. (X ⊆ X is true, and X ⊊ X is false for any set X.) The empty set { }, denoted by ∅, is also a subset of any given set X. It is also always a proper subset of any set except itself. The set {x: x is a prime number greater than 10} is a proper subset of {x: x is an odd number greater than 10} The set of natural numbers is a proper subset of the set of rational numbers; likewise, the set of points in a line segment is a proper subset of the set of points in a line. These are two examples in which both the subset and the whole set are infinite, and the subset has the same cardinality (the concept that corresponds to size, that is, the number of elements, of a finite set) as the whole; such cases can run counter to one's initial intuition. The set of rational numbers is a proper subset of the set of real numbers. In this example, both sets are infinite but the latter set has a larger cardinality (or power) than the former set. Another example in an Euler diagram: A is a proper subset of B C is a subset but not a proper subset of B Other properties of inclusion[edit] A ⊆ B and B ⊆ C imply A ⊆ C Inclusion is the canonical partial order in the sense that every partially ordered set (X, ) is isomorphic to some collection of sets ordered by inclusion. The ordinal numbers are a simple example—if each ordinal n is identified with the set [n] of all ordinals less than or equal to n, then a ≤ b if and only if [a] ⊆ [b]. For the power set of a set S, the inclusion partial order is (up to an order isomorphism) the Cartesian product of k = |S| (the cardinality of S) copies of the partial order on {0,1} for which 0 < 1. This can be illustrated by enumerating S = {s1, s2, …, sk} and associating with each subset T ⊆ S (which is to say with each element of 2S) the k-tuple from {0,1}k of which the ith coordinate is 1 if and only if si is a member of T. See also[edit] Containment order References[edit] ^ Rosen, Kenneth H. (2012). Discrete Mathematics and Its Applications (7th ed.). New York: McGraw-Hill. p. 119. ISBN 978-0-07-338309-5.  ^ Rudin, Walter (1987), Real and complex analysis (3rd ed.), New York: McGraw-Hill, p. 6, ISBN 978-0-07-054234-1, MR 924157  ^ Subsets and Proper Subsets (PDF), retrieved 2012-09-07  Jech, Thomas (2002). Set Theory. Springer-Verlag. ISBN 3-540-44085-2.  External links[edit] Weisstein, Eric W., "Subset", MathWorld. v t e Mathematical logic General Formal language Formation rule Formal system Deductive system Formal proof Formal semantics Well-formed formula Set Element Class Classical logic Axiom Natural deduction Rule of inference Relation Theorem Logical consequence Axiomatic system Type theory Symbol Syntax Theory Traditional logic Proposition Inference Argument Validity Cogency Syllogism Square of opposition Venn diagram Propositional calculus Boolean logic Boolean functions Propositional calculus Propositional formula Logical connectives Truth tables Predicate logic First-order Quantifiers Predicate Second-order Monadic predicate calculus Naive set theory Set Empty set Enumeration Extensionality Finite set Infinite set Subset Power set Countable set Uncountable set Recursive set Domain Range Map Function Relation Ordered pair Set theory Foundations of mathematics Zermelo–Fraenkel set theory Axiom of choice General set theory Kripke–Platek set theory Von Neumann–Bernays–Gödel set theory Morse–Kelley set theory Tarski–Grothendieck set theory Model theory Model Interpretation Non-standard model Finite model theory Truth value Validity Proof theory Formal proof Deductive system Formal system Theorem Logical consequence Rule of inference Syntax Computability theory Recursion Recursive set Recursively enumerable set Decision problem Church–Turing thesis Computable function Primitive recursive function v t e Set theory Axioms Choice countable dependent Extensionality Infinity Pairing Power set Regularity Union Martin's axiom Axiom schema replacement specification Operations Cartesian product Complement De Morgan's laws Disjoint union Intersection Power set Set difference Symmetric difference Union Concepts Methods Cardinality Cardinal number (large) Class Constructible universe Continuum hypothesis Diagonal argument Element ordered pair tuple Family Forcing One-to-one correspondence Ordinal number Transfinite induction Venn diagram Set types Countable Empty Finite (hereditarily) Fuzzy Infinite Recursive Subset · Superset Transitive Uncountable Universal Theories Alternative Axiomatic Naive Cantor's theorem Zermelo General Principia Mathematica New Foundations Zermelo–Fraenkel von Neumann–Bernays–Gödel Morse–Kelley Kripke–Platek Tarski–Grothendieck Paradoxes Problems Russell's paradox Suslin's problem Set theorists Abraham Fraenkel Bertrand Russell Ernst Zermelo Georg Cantor John von Neumann Kurt Gödel Lotfi A. Zadeh Paul Bernays Paul Cohen Richard Dedekind Thomas Jech Willard Quine Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Subset&oldid=713023920" Categories: Basic concepts in set theory Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Article Talk Variants Views Read Edit View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Featured content Current events Random article Donate to Wikipedia Wikipedia store Interaction Help About Wikipedia Community portal Recent changes Contact page Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Cite this page Print/export Create a book Download as PDF Printable version Languages አማርኛ العربية বাংলা Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца)‎ Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית Kurdî Magyar Македонски Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Polski Português Română Русский Scots Sicilianu Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina کوردیی ناوەندی Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska ไทย Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt Võro 文言 West-Vlams 中文 Edit links This page was last modified on 1 April 2016, at 13:20. Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view