Lower house - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Lower house From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to: navigation, search For the demesne in The Keys to the Kingdom series, see The House (The Keys to the Kingdom) § The Lower House. Legislature Chambers Unicameralism Multicameralism Bicameralism Tricameralism Tetracameralism Upper house (Senate) Lower house Parliament Parliamentary system Parliamentary group Member of parliament International parliament Parliamentary procedure Committee Quorum Motion (no-confidence) Types Congress (Member of Congress) City council (Councillor) The Estates Legislatures by country v t e A lower house is one of two chambers of a bicameral legislature, the other chamber being the upper house.[1] Inside the Australian House of Representatives Despite its official position "below" the upper house, in many legislatures worldwide, the lower house has come to wield more power. A legislature composed of only one house is described as unicameral. Contents 1 Common attributes 2 Titles of lower houses 2.1 Common names 2.2 Unique Names 3 See also 4 Notes and references Common attributes[edit] In comparison with the upper house, lower houses frequently display certain characteristics: Powers In a parliamentary system: Much more power, usually based on restrictions against the upper house. Able to override the upper house in some ways. Can vote a motion of no confidence against the government. Exceptions are Australia, where the Senate has considerable power approximate to that of the House of Representatives, and Italy, where the Senate has exactly the same powers as the Chamber of Deputies. In a presidential system: Somewhat less power, as the upper house alone gives advice and consent to some executives decisions (e.g. appointments). Given the sole power to impeach the executive (the upper house then tries the impeachment) Status Always elected directly, while the upper house may be elected indirectly, or not elected at all. Its members may be elected with a different voting system to the upper house. Most populated administrative divisions are better represented than in the upper house; representation is usually proportional to population. Elected more frequently. Elected all at once, not by staggered terms. In a parliamentary system, can be dissolved by the executive. More members. Has total or original control over budget and monetary laws. Lower age of candidacy than the upper house. Titles of lower houses[edit] Common names[edit] Dáil Éireann, Republic of Ireland Many lower houses are named in the following manner: House/Chamber of Representatives/the People/Commons/Deputies. Chamber of Deputies Chamber of Representatives House of Assembly House of Representatives House of Commons House of Delegates Legislative Assembly National Assembly Unique Names[edit] Lok Sabha (India) Dewan Perwakilan Rakyat (Indonesia) Dáil Éireann (Ireland) Dewan Rakyat (Malaysia) Congress of Deputies (Spain) Mazhilis (Kazakhstan) House of Keys (Isle of Man) Sejm (Republic of Poland) (not to be confused with the Great Sejm) State Duma (Russia) Tweede Kamer (Second Chamber) (Netherlands) Bundestag (Germany) Pyithu Hluttaw (Myanmar) [2] See also[edit] Representative democracy Notes and references[edit] ^ Bicameralism (1997) by George Tsebelis ^ "http://www.pyithuhluttaw.gov.mm/". www.pyithuhluttaw.gov.mm. Retrieved 2016-03-02.  External link in |title= (help) v t e Lower houses of national legislatures Federal Argentina Australia Austria Belgium Bosnia and Herzegovina Brazil Canada Ethiopia Germany India Malaysia Mexico Nigeria Pakistan Russia South Sudan Sudan Switzerland United States Unitary Afghanistan Algeria Antigua and Barbuda Bahamas Bahrain Barbados Belarus Belize Bhutan Bolivia Burundi Cambodia Cameroon Chile Colombia Democratic Republic of the Congo Republic of the Congo Czech Republic Dominican Republic Equatorial Guinea France Gabon Grenada Haiti Indonesia Ireland Italy Jamaica Japan Jordan Kazakhstan Kenya Lesotho Liberia Madagascar Mauritania Morocco Myanmar Namibia Netherlands Oman Palau Paraguay Philippines Poland Romania Rwanda Saint Lucia Slovenia Somalia South Africa Spain Swaziland Tajikistan Trinidad and Tobago United Kingdom Uruguay Uzbekistan Zimbabwe Dependent and other territories American Samoa Bermuda Isle of Man Northern Mariana Islands Puerto Rico Non-UN states Somaliland Related Bicameralism Unicameralism List of legislatures by country National upper houses National bicameral legislatures National unicameral legislatures Portals Access related topics Law portal Politics portal Find out more on Wikipedia's Sister projects Media from Commons Definitions from Wiktionary Data from Wikidata Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Lower_house&oldid=708949134" Categories: Lower houses Legislatures Hidden categories: CS1 errors: external links Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Article Talk Variants Views Read Edit View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Featured content Current events Random article Donate to Wikipedia Wikipedia store Interaction Help About Wikipedia Community portal Recent changes Contact page Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Cite this page Print/export Create a book Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Languages العربية Brezhoneg Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Português Română Simple English Soomaaliga کوردیی ناوەندی Svenska தமிழ் ไทย Українська اردو Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links This page was last modified on 8 March 2016, at 10:18. Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view