Unitary state - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Unitary state From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to: navigation, search This article has multiple issues. Please help improve it (see how) or discuss these issues on the talk page. The examples and perspective in this article deal primarily with the Anglosphere and do not represent a worldwide view of the subject. Please improve this article and discuss the issue on the talk page. (February 2011) This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (December 2015) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)   Unitary states   Federations Part of the Politics series Basic forms of government Power structure Chiefdom Confederation Empire Federation Hegemony Unitary state Power source Authoritarian state Autocracy Despotism Illiberal democracy Semi-authoritarian Dictatorship Totalitarianism Democracy Direct Representative Semi others Monarchy Absolute Constitutional Legalist Oligarchy Aristocracy Military junta Plutocracy Stratocracy Timocracy Theocracy Kritarchy Particracy Other Republic Anarchy Anocracy Minarchy Politics portal v t e A unitary state is a state governed as a single power in which the central government is ultimately supreme and any administrative divisions (sub-national units) exercise only powers that the central government chooses to delegate. The majority of states in the world have a unitary system of government. Of the 193 UN member states, 165 of them are governed as unitary states. Unitary states are contrasted with federal states (federations). In a unitary state, sub-national units are created and abolished, and their powers may be broadened and narrowed, by the central government. Although political power may be delegated through devolution to local governments by statute, the central government remains supreme; it may abrogate the acts of devolved governments or curtail their powers. The United Kingdom is an example of a unitary state. Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland have a degree of autonomous devolved power, but such power is delegated by the Parliament of the United Kingdom, which may enact laws unilaterally altering or abolishing devolution (England does not have any devolved power).[1] Many unitary states have no areas possessing a degree of autonomy. In such countries, sub-national regions cannot decide their own laws. Examples are the Republic of Ireland, Norway[2] In federal states, the sub-national governments share powers with the central government as equal actors through a written constitution, to which the consent of both is required to make amendments. This means that the sub-national units have a right of existence and powers that cannot be unilaterally changed by the central government. The United States of America is an example of a federal state. Under the US Constitution, powers are shared between the federal government and the states. Its Article V states that the approval of three-quarters of the states, in either their legislatures or state ratifying conventions, must be granted for an amendment to take effect, giving the states a strong degree of protection from emasculation by the centre.[3] Contents 1 List of unitary states 1.1 Unitary republic 1.2 Unitary monarchy 1.3 5 largest unitary states by nominal GDP 1.4 5 largest unitary states by population 1.5 5 largest unitary states by area 2 See also 3 References 4 External links List of unitary states[edit] Unitary republic[edit]  Afghanistan  Albania  Algeria  Angola  Armenia  Azerbaijan  Bangladesh  Belarus  Benin  Bolivia  Botswana  Bulgaria  Burkina Faso  Burundi  Cameroon  Cape Verde  Central African Republic  Chad  Chile  China[4]  Colombia  Congo  Costa Rica  Croatia  Cuba  Cyprus  Czech Republic  Djibouti  Dominica  Dominican Republic  Democratic Republic of the Congo  East Timor  Ecuador  Egypt  El Salvador  Equatorial Guinea  Eritrea  Estonia  Fiji  Finland  France  Gabon  Gambia  Georgia  Ghana  Greece  Guatemala  Guinea  Guinea-Bissau  Guyana  Haiti  Honduras  Hungary  Iceland  Indonesia  Iran  Ireland  Israel  Italy  Ivory Coast  Kazakhstan  Kenya  Kiribati  Kyrgyzstan  Laos  Latvia  Lebanon  Liberia  Libya  Lithuania  Macedonia  Madagascar  Malawi  Maldives  Mali  Malta  Marshall Islands  Mauritania  Mauritius  Moldova  Mongolia  Montenegro  Mozambique  Myanmar  Namibia  Nauru  Nicaragua  Niger  North Korea  Palau  Palestine  Panama  Paraguay  Peru  Philippines  Poland  Portugal  Romania  Rwanda  Samoa  San Marino  São Tomé and Príncipe  Senegal  Serbia  Seychelles  Sierra Leone  Singapore  Slovakia  Slovenia  South Africa  South Korea  Sri Lanka  Suriname  Syria  Taiwan  Tajikistan  Tanzania  Togo  Trinidad and Tobago  Tunisia  Turkey  Turkmenistan  Uganda  Ukraine  Uruguay  Uzbekistan  Vanuatu  Vietnam  Yemen  Zambia  Zimbabwe Unitary monarchy[edit]  Andorra  Antigua and Barbuda  Bahrain  Bahamas  Barbados  Belize  Bhutan  Brunei  Cambodia  Denmark  Grenada  Jamaica  Japan  Jordan  Kuwait  Lesotho  Liechtenstein  Luxembourg  Monaco  Morocco  Netherlands  New Zealand[5]  Norway  Oman  Papua New Guinea  Qatar  Saint Lucia  Saint Vincent and the Grenadines  Saudi Arabia  Solomon Islands  Spain  Sweden  Thailand  Tonga  Tuvalu  United Kingdom[6]   Vatican City 5 largest unitary states by nominal GDP[edit]  China  Japan  United Kingdom  France  Italy 5 largest unitary states by population[edit]  China  Indonesia  Bangladesh  Japan  Philippines 5 largest unitary states by area[edit]  China  Kazakhstan  Algeria  Democratic Republic of the Congo  Denmark See also[edit] Centralized government Constitutional economics Political economy Regional state Rule according to higher law Unitary authority References[edit] ^ Devolution within a unitary state, like federalism, may be symmetrical, with all sub-national units having the same powers and status, or asymmetric, with sub-national units varying in their powers and status. ^ Svalbard has even less autonomy than the mainland. It is directly controlled by the government and has no local rule. ^ Many federal states also have unitary lower levels of government; while the United States is federal, the states themselves are unitary under Dillon's Rule – counties and municipalities have only the authority granted to them by the state governments under their state constitution or by legislative acts. For example, in the state of Connecticut, county government was abolished in 1960. ^ Roy Bin Wong. China Transformed: Historical Change and the Limits of European Experience. Cornell University Press.  ^ "Story: Nation and government – From colony to nation". The Encyclopedia of New Zealand. Manatū Taonga Ministry for Culture and Heritage. 29 August 2013. Retrieved 19 April 2014.  ^ "Social policy in the UK". An introduction to Social Policy. Robert Gordon University - Aberdeen Business School. Retrieved 19 April 2014.  External links[edit] Open University – The UK model of devolution Open University – Devolution in Scotland Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Unitary_state&oldid=718765748" Categories: Forms of government Political geography Constitutional state types Hidden categories: Articles with limited geographic scope from February 2011 Pages in non-existent country centric categories Articles needing additional references from December 2015 All articles needing additional references Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Article Talk Variants Views Read Edit View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Featured content Current events Random article Donate to Wikipedia Wikipedia store Interaction Help About Wikipedia Community portal Recent changes Contact page Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Cite this page Print/export Create a book Download as PDF Printable version Languages Alemannisch العربية Asturianu Azərbaycanca Беларуская Български Bosanski Català Cebuano Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Gaelg Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Ilokano Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Қазақша Latviešu Lietuvių Македонски Монгол Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Oʻzbekcha/ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پښتو Polski Português Română Русский Scots සිංහල Simple English Slovenčina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Basa Sunda Suomi Svenska ไทย Türkçe Türkmençe Українська اردو 中文 Edit links This page was last modified on 5 May 2016, at 13:49. Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view