User talk:Mindstar - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia User talk:Mindstar From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to: navigation, search Welcome! Hello, Mindstar, and welcome to Wikipedia! Thank you for your contributions. I hope you like the place and decide to stay. Here are a few good links for newcomers: The five pillars of Wikipedia How to edit a page Help pages Tutorial How to write a great article Manual of Style I hope you enjoy editing here and being a Wikipedian! Please sign your name on talk pages using four tildes (~~~~); this will automatically produce your name and the date. If you need help, check out Wikipedia:Where to ask a question, ask me on my talk page, or place {{helpme}} on your talk page and someone will show up shortly to answer your questions. Again, welcome!  --Bachrach44 02:43, 12 December 2005 (UTC) Contents 1 Attack 2 Giles Corey 3 Robert F. Kennedy assassination 4 Proposed deletion of Toby Horton 5 Lynne Featherstone 6 ArbCom elections are now open! Attack[edit] Hello, this is a message from an automated bot. A tag has been placed on this page, by ArtVandelay13, another Wikipedia user, requesting that it be speedily deleted from Wikipedia. The tag claims that it should be speedily deleted because the article is a page created primarily to disparage its subject or a biography of a living person that is controversial in tone and unsourced, where there is no neutral point of view version in the history to revert to. (CSD G10). To contest the tagging and request that administrators wait before possibly deleting the article, please affix the template {{hangon}} to the page, and put a note on its talk page. If the article has already been deleted, see the advice and instructions at WP:WMD. Please note, this bot is only informing you of the nomination for speedy deletion, it did not nominate the article itself. Feel free to leave a message on the bot operator's talk page if you have any questions about this or any problems with this bot. --Android Mouse Bot 2 23:32, 29 May 2007 (UTC) Giles Corey[edit] Dear Mindstar, I saw what you said about the Giles Corey article and I agree with you 100%. That is why myself and a fellow Wikipedian created the Wikipedia:WikiProject Massachusetts/Salem Witch Trials Task Force in order to re-write many of these poorly written articles and stubs. Will you please help us in our task and join our Taskforce! Your help and thoughts would be very appreicted! Thanks! Sincerely, Psdubow 17:42, 15 June 2007 (UTC) Robert F. Kennedy assassination[edit] Hi there. You may not be aware of this, but a few weeks ago I performed a large overhaul of this article, principally to cleanup and remove fringe material that was unreferenced or violated the principles of WP:FRINGE and WP:WEIGHT. As an editor who was recently critical of this article, I would appreciate your comments on the renewed version. Best wishes. Fritzpoll (talk) 13:04, 12 May 2008 (UTC) Proposed deletion of Toby Horton[edit] A proposed deletion template has been added to the article Toby Horton, suggesting that it be deleted according to the proposed deletion process. All contributions are appreciated, but this article may not satisfy Wikipedia's criteria for inclusion, and the deletion notice should explain why (see also "What Wikipedia is not" and Wikipedia's deletion policy). You may prevent the proposed deletion by removing the {{dated prod}} notice, but please explain why you disagree with the proposed deletion in your edit summary or on its talk page. Please consider improving the article to address the issues raised because even though removing the deletion notice will prevent deletion through the proposed deletion process, the article may still be deleted if it matches any of the speedy deletion criteria or it can be sent to Articles for Deletion, where it may be deleted if consensus to delete is reached. Do you want to opt out of receiving this notice? Terraxos (talk) 03:48, 22 May 2008 (UTC) Lynne Featherstone[edit] Welcome to Wikipedia. It might not have been your intention, but your edit removed content from Lynne Featherstone. When removing content, please specify a reason in the edit summary and discuss edits that are likely to be controversial on the article's talk page. If this was a mistake, don't worry; the content has been restored, as you can see from the page history. Take a look at the welcome page to learn more about contributing to this encyclopedia, and if you would like to experiment, please use the sandbox. Thank you. Shakehandsman (talk) 05:00, 21 September 2011 (UTC) ArbCom elections are now open![edit] Hi, You appear to be eligible to vote in the current Arbitration Committee election. The Arbitration Committee is the panel of editors responsible for conducting the Wikipedia arbitration process. It has the authority to enact binding solutions for disputes between editors, primarily related to serious behavioural issues that the community has been unable to resolve. This includes the ability to impose site bans, topic bans, editing restrictions, and other measures needed to maintain our editing environment. The arbitration policy describes the Committee's roles and responsibilities in greater detail. If you wish to participate, you are welcome to review the candidates' statements and submit your choices on the voting page. For the Election committee, MediaWiki message delivery (talk) 13:36, 23 November 2015 (UTC) Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=User_talk:Mindstar&oldid=692008618" Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces User page Talk Variants Views Read Edit New section View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Featured content Current events Random article Donate to Wikipedia Wikipedia store Interaction Help About Wikipedia Community portal Recent changes Contact page Tools What links here Related changes User contributions Logs Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Print/export Create a book Download as PDF Printable version Languages This page was last modified on 23 November 2015, at 13:36. Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view