Dependent territory - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Dependent territory From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to: navigation, search A dependent territory, dependent area, dependency or autonomous territory is a territory that does not possess full political independence or sovereignty as a sovereign state yet remains politically outside of the controlling state's integral area.[1] A dependency is commonly distinguished from subnational entities in that they are not considered to be part of the integral territory of the governing state. A subnational entity typically represents a division of the state proper, while a dependent territory often maintains a great degree of autonomy from the controlling state. Historically, most colonies were considered to be dependencies of their controlling state. The dependencies that remain generally maintain a very high degree of political autonomy. At the same time, not all autonomous entities are considered to be dependencies.[2] Many political entities have a special position recognized by international treaty or agreement resulting in a certain level of autonomy or differences in immigration rules. These are sometimes[3] considered dependencies,[4] but are officially considered by their controlling states to be integral parts of the state.[3] Examples are Åland (Finland), Hong Kong (China), and Macau (China).[5] Contents 1 Summary of list contents 2 Lists of dependent territories 2.1 New Zealand 2.2 Norway 2.3 United Kingdom 2.4 United States 3 Lists of other entities 3.1 Australia 3.2 China 3.3 Denmark 3.4 Finland 3.5 France 3.6 Netherlands 3.7 Norway 4 Description 5 See also 6 Notes and references 7 Bibliography 8 External links Summary of list contents[edit] The following listings indicate (or can be interpreted to indicate): Dependent territories 2 states in free association, 1 dependent territory and 1 dependency claim in the listing for New Zealand; 1 dependent territory and 2 dependency claims in the listing for Norway; 12 dependent territories, 3 Crown dependencies, 1 group of sovereign base areas and 1 dependency claim in the listing for the United Kingdom; 13 dependent territories, 2 dependency claims and 1 unorganized incorporated territory in the listing for the United States. Other entities 6 territories in administration and 1 dependency claim in the listing for Australia; 2 special administrative regions in the listing for China; 2 territories with autonomy in internal affairs in the listing for Denmark; 1 territory governed according to an act and international treaties in the listing for Finland; 8 autonomous overseas possessions in the listing for France; 3 territories with autonomy in internal affairs and 3 integrated territories in the listing for the Netherlands; 2 territories with limited sovereignty in the listing for Norway. Lists of dependent territories[edit] Dependency claims without general international recognition, including all claims in Antarctica, are listed in italics. The list includes several territories that are not included in the list of non-self-governing territories listed by the General Assembly of the United Nations.[6] This list includes territories that have not been legally incorporated into their governing state. New Zealand[edit] See also: Realm of New Zealand Summary: The Realm of New Zealand includes two self-governing states in free association with New Zealand, one dependent territory (Tokelau) and a territorial claim in Antarctica In free association Administration ISO 3166 country code Cook Islands Self-governing state in free association with New Zealand since 1965. Cook Islands' status is considered to be equivalent to independence for international law purposes, and the country exercises full sovereignty over its internal and external affairs.[7] Under the terms of the free association agreement, however, New Zealand retains some responsibility for the foreign relations and defence of the Cook Islands. These responsibilities confer no rights of control and are exercised only at the request of the Cook Islands Government. CK COK 184 Niue Self-governing state in free association with New Zealand since 1974. Niue's status is considered to be equivalent to independence for international law purposes, and the country exercises full sovereignty over its internal and external affairs.[7] Under the terms of the free association agreement, however, New Zealand retains some responsibility for the foreign relations and defence of Niue. These responsibilities confer no rights of control and are exercised only at the request of the Government of Niue. NU NIU 570 Territory Administration ISO 3166 country code Tokelau Territory of New Zealand. As it moves toward free association with New Zealand, Tokelau and New Zealand have agreed to a draft constitution. A UN-sponsored referendum on self-governance in February 2006 did not produce the two-thirds supermajority necessary for changing the current political status. Another one was in October 2007, which failed to reach the ⅔ margin. TK TKL 772 Ross Dependency No permanent population. New Zealand's Antarctic claim. no separate code Norway[edit] See also: Dependencies of Norway Summary: Norway has 1 dependent territory and 2 dependency claims. Dependency Administration ISO 3166 country code Bouvet Island No permanent population. Dependency administered from Oslo by the Polar Affairs Department of the Ministry of Justice and the Police. BV BVT 074 Peter I Island No permanent population. Dependencies (subject to the Antarctic Treaty System) administered from Oslo by the Polar Affairs Department of the Ministry of Justice and the Police. no separate code Queen Maud Land no separate code United Kingdom[edit] See also: British overseas territories, Crown dependencies, and Sovereign Base Areas Summary: the United Kingdom has 12 dependent territories, 3 crown dependencies, 1 group of sovereign base areas and 1 dependency claim. Overseas territories (inhabited) Administration ISO 3166 country code Anguilla House of Assembly of Anguilla handles domestic affairs. Appears on the United Nations list of Non-Self-Governing Territories. AI AIA 660 Bermuda Parliament of Bermuda handles domestic affairs and the territory is defined by the UK as self-governing. Appears on the United Nations list of Non-Self-Governing Territories. BM BMU 060 British Indian Ocean Territory Administered by the Commissioner of the British Indian Ocean Territory from the Foreign and Commonwealth Office, London. Original population removed, restricted to military personnel. IO IOT 086 British Virgin Islands House of Assembly of the British Virgin Islands handles domestic affairs. Appears on the United Nations list of Non-Self-Governing Territories VG VGB 092 Cayman Islands Legislative Assembly of the Cayman Islands handles domestic affairs. Appears on the United Nations list of Non-Self-Governing Territories. KY CYM 136 Falkland Islands Legislative Assembly of the Falkland Islands handles domestic affairs. Appears on the United Nations list of Non-Self-Governing Territories. Also claimed by Argentina. FK FLK 238 Gibraltar Gibraltar Parliament handles domestic affairs. Almost complete internal self-government. Appears on the United Nations list of Non-Self-Governing Territories. GI GIB 292 Montserrat Legislative Council of Montserrat handles domestic affairs. Appears on the United Nations list of Non-Self-Governing Territories. MS MSR 500 Pitcairn Islands Island Council of the Pitcairn Islands handles some domestic affairs, however decisions are subject to approval by the Governor of the Pitcairn Islands. Appears on the United Nations list of Non-Self-Governing Territories. PN PCN 612 Saint Helena, Ascension and Tristan da Cunha Legislative Council of Saint Helena, Ascension Island Council and Tristan da Cunha Island Council handle domestic affairs. Appears on the United Nations list of Non-Self-Governing Territories. SH SHN 654 Turks and Caicos Islands House of Assembly of the Turks and Caicos Islands handles some domestic affairs. Appears on the United Nations list of Non-Self-Governing Territories. TC TCA 796 Overseas territories (uninhabited) Administration ISO 3166 country code South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands Administered by the Commissioner of South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands, who is also the Governor of the Falkland Islands. No permanent population. Also claimed by Argentina. GS SGS 239 British Antarctic Territory Administered by the Commissioner of the British Antarctic Territory from the Foreign and Commonwealth Office, London. No permanent population. The UK's Antarctic claim. no separate code Sovereign Base Areas Administration ISO 3166 country code  Akrotiri and Dhekelia Administered by the Commander of British Forces, Cyprus. no separate code Crown dependencies Administration ISO 3166 country code Guernsey Responsibility for defence, international representation, and good government rests with the United Kingdom. Though, the Parliament of the United Kingdom can legislate on their behalf, if it deem necessary.[8][9][10] GG GGY 831 Jersey JE JEY 832 Isle of Man IM IMN 833 United States[edit] See also: Insular area and Territories of the United States Summary: the United States has 11 dependent territories and 2 dependency claims. The United States also has one incorporated territory. Unincorporated Organized territories (inhabited) Administration ISO 3166 country code Guam Unincorporated organized territory; policy relations between Guam and the U.S. conducted under the jurisdiction of the Office of Insular Affairs, U.S. Department of the Interior. Appears on the United Nations list of Non-Self-Governing Territories. GU GUM 316 Northern Mariana Islands Commonwealth in political union with the U.S.; federal funding administered by the Office of Insular Affairs, U.S. Department of the Interior. MP MNP 580 Puerto Rico Unincorporated organized territory of the U.S. with commonwealth status; policy relations between Puerto Rico and the U.S. conducted under the jurisdiction of the Office of the President. PR PRI 630 U.S. Virgin Islands Unincorporated organized territory; policy relations between the Virgin Islands and the U.S. conducted under the jurisdiction of the Office of Insular Affairs, U.S. Department of the Interior. Appears on the United Nations list of Non-Self-Governing Territories. VI VIR 850 Unincorporated Unorganized territories (inhabited) Administration ISO 3166 country code American Samoa Unincorporated and unorganized territory administered by the Office of Insular Affairs, U.S. Department of the Interior. Appears on the United Nations list of Non-Self-Governing Territories. AS ASM 016 Wake Island Unorganized and unincorporated territory administered from Washington, D.C. by the Fish and Wildlife Service of the United States Department of the Interior. Claimed by the Marshall Islands. UM UMI 581 Unincorporated Unorganized territories (uninhabited) Administration ISO 3166 country code Baker Island Unorganized and unincorporated territory Supervised by the U.S. Air Force, administered from Washington, D.C. by the U.S. Department of the Interior, and is claimed by the Marshall Islands. UM UMI 581 Howland Island Jarvis Island Johnston Atoll Kingman Reef Midway Island Navassa Island Unincorporated territory of the U.S. administered by the Fish and Wildlife Service of the U.S. Department of the Interior from the Caribbean Islands National Wildlife Refuge in Boquerón, Puerto Rico. Claimed by Haiti and privately via the Guano Islands Act. Incorporated Unorganized territory (uninhabited) Administration ISO 3166 country code Palmyra Atoll Lists of other entities[edit] The following entities are according to the law of their state full part of their governing country, but exhibit characteristics of dependent territories. Most inhabited territories have their own ISO 3166 country codes. Australia[edit] See also: States and territories of Australia Summary: Australia has 6 territories in its administration and 1 dependency claim. Although all territories of Australia are considered to be fully integrated in its federative system, and the official status of an external territory does not differ largely from that of a mainland territory (except in regards to immigration law), debate remains as to whether the external territories are integral parts of Australia, due to their not being part of Australia in 1901, when its constituent states federated.[11] They are often listed separately for statistical purposes. External territories (inhabited) Administration ISO 3166 country code Christmas Island Administered from Canberra by the Attorney-General's Department.[12][13] CX CXR 162 Cocos (Keeling) Islands CC CCK 166 Norfolk Island Commonwealth responsibilities administered from Canberra through the Attorney-General's Department.[12] NF NFK 574 External territories (uninhabited) Administration ISO 3166 country code Ashmore and Cartier Islands Administered from Canberra by the Attorney-General's Department.[12] no separate code Coral Sea Islands[14] no separate code Australian Antarctic Territory Administered from Canberra by the Australian Antarctic Division of the Department of the Environment and Heritage. no separate code Heard Island and McDonald Islands HM HMD 334 China[edit] See also: Special Administrative Region of the People's Republic of China Summary: China has 2 special administrative regions which are governed according to international treaties. Special Administrative Regions Administration ISO 3166 country code Hong Kong Former British colony. Special Administrative Region of the People's Republic of China since 1997 pursuant to the Sino-British Joint Declaration, an international treaty registered with the United Nations. The Hong Kong Basic Law provides for the territory to enjoy a high degree of autonomy in accordance with the one country, two systems model under the central government of China. Although the territory is not part of Mainland China, it is officially considered as an integral part of the People's Republic of China.[15][16][17] HK HKG 344 Macau Former Portuguese colony. Special Administrative Region of the People's Republic of China since 1999 pursuant to the Sino-Portuguese Joint Declaration, an international treaty registered with the United Nations. The Macau Basic Law provides for the territory to enjoy a high degree of autonomy in accordance with the "one country, two systems" model under the central government of China. Although the territory is not part of Mainland China, it is officially considered as an integral part of the People's Republic of China. MO MAC 446 Denmark[edit] See also: Unity of the Realm Summary: The Kingdom of Denmark contains 2 self-governing countries. Constituent country Administration ISO 3166 country code Faroe Islands Self-governing overseas administrative division since 1948. Part of Denmark, but not of the European Union. FO FRO 234 Greenland Self-governing overseas administrative division since 1979. Part of Denmark. Withdrew from the European Economic Community in 1985. GL GRL 304 Finland[edit] See also: Administrative divisions of Finland Summary: Finland has 1 territory governed according to an act and international treaties. Division Administration ISO 3166 country code Åland Islands The Åland Islands are governed according to the Act on the Autonomy of Åland and international treaties. These laws guarantee the islands' autonomy from Finland, which has ultimate sovereignty over them, as well as a demilitarized status AX ALA 248 France[edit] See also: Overseas departments and territories of France Summary: France has 8 autonomous overseas possessions, not counting the overseas departments and regions of Réunion, Guadeloupe, Martinique, French Guiana, and Mayotte, which, although located overseas, have the same political status as mainland France's regions and are fully part of the European Union. All of France's possessions are considered to be integral parts of the French Republic. Overseas Collectivities Administration ISO 3166 country code Saint Barthélemy Seceded from Guadeloupe to become an overseas collectivity in 2007. BL BLM 652 Saint Martin Seceded from Guadeloupe to become an overseas collectivity in 2007. It is the only overseas collectivity which is fully part of the European Union. MF MAF 663 Saint Pierre and Miquelon Territorial collectivity since 1985; overseas collectivity since 2003. PM SPM 666 Wallis and Futuna Overseas territory since 1961; overseas collectivity since 2003. WF WLF 876 French Polynesia Overseas collectivity since 2003 named Overseas country since 2004. Appears on the United Nations list of Non-Self-Governing Territories. PF PYF 258 Special Collectivity Administration ISO 3166 country code New Caledonia "Sui generis" collectivity since 1999. Appears on the United Nations list of Non-Self-Governing Territories. NC NCL 540 Possession (uninhabited) Administration ISO 3166 country code Clipperton Island Island administered by the Minister for Overseas Territories. No permanent population. no separate code Overseas territory (uninhabited) Administration ISO 3166 country code French Southern and Antarctic Lands The French Southern and Antarctic Lands (called TAAF for Terres australes et antartiques françaises) is an Overseas territory since 1955, administered from Paris by an Administrateur Supérieur. No permanent population. Includes the French territorial claim in Antarctica: Adelie Land. TF ATF 260 Netherlands[edit] See also: Kingdom of the Netherlands Summary: The Kingdom of the Netherlands consists of 3 Caribbean countries, territories with autonomy in internal affairs and one country (Netherlands) with most of its area in Europe, but which includes 3 Caribbean territories. All Dutch citizens of the Kingdom share the same nationality and are thus citizens of the European Union. Country Administration ISO 3166 country code Aruba Each is defined as a "country" ("land") within the Kingdom of the Netherlands by the Statute of the Kingdom of the Netherlands. Aruba obtained full autonomy in internal affairs upon separation from the Netherlands Antilles in 1986. Curaçao and Sint Maarten were part of the Netherlands Antilles until it was dissolved in October 2010. The government of the Kingdom of the Netherlands virtually but not entirely coincides with the government of the Netherlands, and is responsible for defence, foreign affairs and nationality law. Part of the Kingdom of the Netherlands but not of the European Union, but owing to their Dutch nationality, its citizens are Citizens of the European Union. AW ABW 533 Curaçao CW CUW 531 Sint Maarten SX SXM 534 Division Administration ISO 3166 country code Bonaire Following the dissolution of the Netherlands Antilles in October 2010, Bonaire, Saba and Sint Eustatius became formally integrated with the Netherlands as special municipalities, although a different system of law exists. The territories are not part of the European Union, but owing to their Dutch nationality, its citizens are Citizens of the European Union. BQ BES 535 Saba Sint Eustatius Norway[edit] See also: Administrative divisions of Norway Summary: Norway has 2 territories with limited Norwegian sovereignty. Division Administration ISO 3166 country code Svalbard Svalbard is subject to an international treaty with some limits to Norwegian sovereignty. SJ SJM 744 Jan Mayen The legal status of Jan Mayen is basically the same as the Svalbard archipelago, and unlike the Norwegian possessions in the Antarctic, which are dependencies and not integral parts of the Kingdom.[18] Jan Mayen shares county governor (fylkesmann) with Nordland county. Description[edit] Three Crown dependencies are in a form of association with the UK. They are independently administrated jurisdictions, although the British Government is solely responsible for defence and international representation, and has ultimate responsibility for ensuring good government. They do not have diplomatic recognition as independent states, but they are not an integrated part of the UK, nor do they form part of the European Union. The UK Parliament retains the ability to legislate for the Crown dependencies even without the agreement of the insular legislatures. None of the Crown dependencies has representatives in the UK Parliament. Bermuda and Gibraltar have similar relationships to the UK as the Crown dependencies. While Britain is officially responsible for defence and international representation, these jurisdictions maintain their own militaries and have been granted limited diplomatic powers, in addition to having internal self-government. Nevertheless, they are British overseas territories. New Zealand and dependencies share the same Governor-General and constitute one realm. The Cook Islands and Niue are officially termed associated states. Puerto Rico (since 1952) and the Northern Mariana Islands (since 1986) are non-independent states freely associated with the United States. The mutually negotiated Covenant to Establish a Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands (CNMI) in Political Union with the United States was approved in 1976. The Covenant was fully implemented November 3, 1986, pursuant to Presidential Proclamation no. 5564, which conferred United States citizenship on legally qualified CNMI residents.[19] Under the Constitution of Puerto Rico, Puerto Rico is described as a Commonwealth and Puerto Ricans have a degree of administrative autonomy similar to citizens of a U.S. state. Puerto Ricans "were collectively made U.S. citizens" in 1917 as a result of the Jones-Shafroth Act.[20][21] The commonly used name in Spanish of the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, Estado Libre Asociado de Puerto Rico, literally "Associated Free State of Puerto Rico", which sounds similar to "free association" particularly when loosely used in Spanish, is sometimes erroneously interpreted to mean that Puerto Rico's relationship with United States is based on a Compact of Free Association and at other times erroneously held to mean that Puerto Rico's relationship with United States is based on an Interstate compact. This is a constant source of ambiguity and confusion when trying to define, understand and explain Puerto Rico's political relationship with the United States. For various reasons Puerto Rico's political status differs from that of the Pacific Islands that entered into Compacts of Free Association with the United States. As sovereign states, these islands have full right to conduct their own foreign relations, while the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico has territorial status subject to United States congressional authority under the Constitution's Territory Clause, "to dispose of and make all needful Rules and Regulations respecting the Territory… belonging to the United States.".[22] Puerto Rico does not have the right to unilaterally declare independence, and at the last referendum (1998) the narrow majority voted for "none of the above", which was a formally undefined alternative used by commonwealth supporters to express their desire for an "enhanced commonwealth" option.[22] This kind of relationship also can be found in the Kingdom of the Netherlands, which is a federacy. The continental part is organized like a unitary state but the status of its territories (Aruba, since 1986, and the Netherlands Antilles, since 1954 until 2010) can be considered dependencies or "associated non-independent states". After the split-up of the Netherlands Antilles, Curaçao and Sint Maarten are separate associated states like Aruba. Additionally, Denmark operates in a similar manner to a federacy. The Faroes and Greenland are two self-governing territories, or regions within the Kingdom. The relationship between Denmark proper and the two territories is semi-officially termed the "Rigsfællesskabet". See also[edit] Associated state Colonisation Colony Condominium Federacy List of autonomous areas by country List of current dependent territory leaders List of sovereign states List of former sovereign states - Section: Former colonies, possessions, protectorates and territories Suzerainty Table of administrative divisions by country Territorial claims in Antarctica United Nations list of Non-Self-Governing Territories Minister of the Colonies Notes and references[edit]  This article incorporates public domain material from websites or documents of the CIA World Factbook. ^ United Nations General Assembly Resolution 1514 ^ United Nations Trusteeship Council ^ a b United Nations General Assembly 15th Session - The Trusteeship System and Non-Self-Governing Territories (pages:509-510) ^ Listaba.com ^ The World Factbook. Cia.gov. Retrieved on 2013-07-12. ^ For the list, see Special Committee on Decolonization (2002). "Trust and Non-Self-Governing Territories". United Nations, Special Committee on Decolonization. Retrieved 2010-09-23.  ^ a b http://www.justice.govt.nz/publications/publications-archived/2000/pacific-peoples-constitution-report-september-2000/documents/Bibliography.doc ^ CIA (2010-07-15). "Guernsey at the CIA's page". CIA. Retrieved 2010-07-15.  ^ CIA (2010-07-15). "Jersey at the CIA's page". CIA. Retrieved 2010-07-15.  ^ CIA (2010-07-15). "The Isle of Man at the CIA's page". CIA. Retrieved 2010-07-15.  ^ Carney, Gerard (2006). The constitutional systems of the Australian states and territories. Canberra: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-86305-6.  ^ a b c First Assistant Secretary, Territories Division (2008-01-30). "Territories of Australia". Attorney-General's Department. Retrieved 2008-02-07. The Federal Government, through the Attorney-General's Department administers Ashmore and Cartier Islands, Christmas Island, the Cocos (Keeling) Islands, the Coral Sea Islands, Jervis Bay, and Norfolk Island as Territories.  ^ Territories and Information Law Division; First Assistant Secretary, Territories and Information Law Division (7 September 2009). "Cocos Islands Governance and Administration". Territories of Australia. Australian Government, Attorney-General's Department. Retrieved 2010-09-23.  ^ Willis Island is permanently manned by a small team of meteorologists. ^ 广电总局批准31个境外频道在涉外宾馆等申请接收. Gov.cn (2006-12-30). Retrieved on 2013-07-12. ^ 2010年第六次全国人口普查主要数据公报（第1号）. Stats.gov.cn. Retrieved on 2013-07-12. ^ 項懷誠：香港是社保基金境外投資的首選地之一. Big5.huaxia.com. Retrieved on 2013-07-12. ^ The Scope for Norwegian Commitments Related to International Research on Jan Mayen Island ^ CIA (2010-07-15). "Northern Mariana Islands at the CIA's page". CIA. Retrieved 2010-07-15.  ^ The Louisiana Purchase and American Expansion: 1803-1898. By Sanford Levinson and Bartholomew H. Sparrow. New York: Rowman and Littlefield Publishers. 2005. Page 166, 178. "U.S. citizenship was extended to residents of Puerto Rico by virtue of the Jones Act, chap. 190, 39 Stat. 951 (1971) (codified at 48 U.S.C. § 731 (1987)") ^ CIA (2010-07-15). "Puerto Rico at the CIA's page". CIA. Retrieved 2010-07-15.  ^ a b December 2005 report of the President's Task Force on Puerto Rico's Status Bibliography[edit] George Drower, Britain's Dependent Territories, Dartmouth, 1992 George Drower, Overseas Territories Handbook, TSO, 1998 External links[edit] WorldStatesmen- includes former dependent states v t e Designations for types of administrative territorial entities   English terms Common English terms1 Area Insular area Local government area Protected area Special area Statistical area Combined statistical area Metropolitan statistical area Micropolitan statistical area Urban area Election Constituency district Precinct Riding Ward City Autonomous city Charter city Independent city Imperial city Free imperial city Royal free city Capital Federal capital County Administrative county Autonomous county Consolidated city-county Metropolitan county Non-metropolitan Viscountcy District Capital district City district Federal district Indian government district Land district Metropolitan district Non-metropolitan district Military district Municipal district Police district Regional district Rural district Sanitary district Subdistrict Urban district Municipality Direct-controlled municipality District municipality Mountain resort municipality Neutral municipality Regional municipality County Resort municipality Rural municipality Specialized municipality Prefecture Autonomous prefecture Subprefecture Super-prefecture Praetorian prefecture Province Autonomous province Overseas province Roman province Region Administrative region Autonomous region Capital region Development region Mesoregion Microregion Overseas region Special administrative region Subregion Reserve Biosphere reserve Ecological reserve Game reserve Indian reserve Nature reserve State Federal state Free state Sovereign state Territory Capital territory Federal capital territory Dependent territory Federal territory Organized incorporated territory Overseas territory Union territory Unorganized territory major groups Canton Half-canton Borough County Metropolitan Community Autonomous Residential Country Constituent Overseas Department Overseas department Town Census Market Township Charter township Civil township Paper township Survey township Urban township Unit Autonomous territorial unit Local administrative unit Municipal unit Zone Economic zone Exclusive economic zone Free economic zone Special economic zone Free trade zone Neutral zone Self-administered zone Time zone Other English terms Current Alpine resort Bailiwick Banner Autonomous Block Cadastre Circle Circuit Colony Commune Condominium Division Police division Subdivision Duchy Eldership Federal dependency Governorate Hamlet Indian reservation Manor Royal Neighbourhood Parish Periphery Principality Protectorate Quarter Regency Autonomous republic Sector Autonomous Shire Suzerainty Townland Village Administrative Summer Historical Agency Barony Burgh Exarchate Hide Hundred Imperial Circle March Monthon Presidency Residency Roman diocese Seat Tenth Tithing   Non-English or loanwords Current Amt Bakhsh Barangay Bezirk Regierungsbezirk Comune Frazione Fu Gemeinde Județ Kunta / kommun Finland Sweden Län Località Megye Muban Oblast Autonomous Okrug Ostān Poblacion Purok Shahrestān Sum Sýsla Tehsil Vingtaine Historical Commote Gau Heerlijkheid Köping Maalaiskunta Nome Egypt Greece Pagus Pargana Plasă Satrapy Subah Syssel Zhou v t e Arabic terms for country subdivisions First-level Muhafazah (محافظة governorate) Wilayah (ولاية province) Mintaqah (منطقة region) Mudiriyah (مديرية directorate) Imarah (إمارة emirate) Baladiyah (بلدية municipality) Shabiyah (شعبية "popularate") Second / third-level Mintaqah (منطقة region) Qadaa (قضاء district) Nahiyah (ناحية subdistrict) Markaz (مركز district) Mutamadiyah (معتمدية "delegation") Daerah/Daïra (دائرة circle) Liwa (لواء banner / sanjak) City / township-level Amanah (أمانة municipality) Baladiyah (بلدية municipality) Ḥai (حي neighborhood / quarter) Mahallah (محلة) Qarya (قرية) Sheyakhah (شياخة "neighborhood subdivision") English translations given are those most commonly used. v t e French terms for country subdivisions arrondissement département préfecture subprefectures v t e Greek terms for country subdivisions Modern apokentromenes dioikiseis / geniki dioikisis§ / diamerisma§ / periphereia nomos§ / periphereiaki enotita demos / eparchia§ / koinotita§ Historical archontia/archontaton bandon demos despotaton dioikesis doukaton droungos eparchia exarchaton katepanikion kephalatikion kleisoura meris naukrareia satrapeia strategis thema toparchia tourma § signifies a defunct institution v t e Portuguese terms for country subdivisions Regional subdivisions Estado Distrito federal Província Região Distrito Comarca Capitania Local subdivisions Município Concelho Freguesia Comuna Circunscrição Setlements Cidade Vila Aldeia Bairro Lugar Historical subdivisions in italics. v t e Slavic terms for country subdivisions Current dzielnica gmina krai kraj krajina / pokrajina městys obec oblast / oblast' / oblasti / oblys / obwód / voblast' okręg okres okrug opština / općina / občina / obshtina osiedle powiat / povit raion selsoviet / silrada sołectwo voivodeship / vojvodina županija Historical darugha gromada guberniya / gubernia jurydyka khutor obshchina okolia opole pogost prowincja sorok starostwo / starostva uyezd volost ziemia župa v t e Spanish terms for country subdivisions National, Federal Comunidad autónoma Departamento Distrito federal Estado Provincia Región Regional, Metropolitan Cantón Comarca Comuna Corregimiento Delegación Distrito Mancomunidad Merindad Municipalidad Municipio Parroquia Ecuador Spain Urban, Rural Aldea Alquería Anteiglesia Asentamiento Asentamiento informal Pueblos jóvenes Barrio Campamento Caserío Ciudad Ciudad autónoma Colonia Lugar Masía Población Ranchería Sitio Vereda Villa Village (Pueblito/Pueblo) Historical subdivisions in italics. v t e Turkish terms for country subdivisions Modern il (province) ilçe (district) belediye (municipality) belde (town) köy (village) mahalle (neighbourhood/quarter) Historical ağalık (feudal district) bucak (subdistrict) beylerbeylik (province) eyalet (province) kadılık (subprovince) kaza (sub-province) hidivlik (viceroyalty) mutasarrıflık (subprovince) nahiye (subdistrict) paşalık (province) reya (Romanian principalities) sancak (prefecture) vilayet (subprovince) voyvodalık (Romanian provinces) 1 Used by ten or more countries or having derived terms. Historical derivations in italics. See also: Census division, Electoral district, Political division, and Table of administrative divisions by country v t e United Nations list of Non-Self-Governing Territories France French Polynesia New Caledonia New Zealand Tokelau Spain / Morocco Western Sahara United Kingdom Anguilla Bermuda British Virgin Islands Cayman Islands Falkland Islands Gibraltar Montserrat Pitcairn Islands Saint Helena, Ascension and Tristan da Cunha Turks and Caicos Islands United States American Samoa Guam United States Virgin Islands v t e Colonial empires      Austro-Hungarian  English  Norwegian (+)  Belgian  French  Portuguese  British  German  Russian  Couronian  Hospitaller  Spanish  Danish  Italian  Swedish  American  Dutch  Japanese  Turkish Colonies in antiquity Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Dependent_territory&oldid=717251773" Categories: Dependent territories Lists of countries Types of country subdivisions Territories Self-governance Hidden categories: Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the World Factbook Articles containing Arabic-language text Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Article Talk Variants Views Read Edit View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Featured content Current events Random article Donate to Wikipedia Wikipedia store Interaction Help About Wikipedia Community portal Recent changes Contact page Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Cite this page Print/export Create a book Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Languages Afrikaans Ænglisc العربية Aragonés Bân-lâm-gú Башҡортса Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца)‎ Български Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Español فارسی Føroyskt Français Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ilokano Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Íslenska Italiano Basa Jawa ქართული Қазақша Latina Latviešu Limburgs Magyar Македонски მარგალური Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Polski Português Română Русский Саха тыла Scots Simple English Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Basa Sunda Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் Türkçe Українська اردو Vèneto Tiếng Việt 粵語 Zazaki 中文 Edit links This page was last modified on 26 April 2016, at 16:09. Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view