Diplomat - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Diplomat From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to: navigation, search For other uses, see Diplomat (disambiguation). A diplomat is a person appointed by a state to conduct diplomacy with one or more other states or international organizations. The main functions of diplomats are representation and protection of the interests and nationals of the sending state, initiation and facilitation of strategic agreements, treaties and conventions, as well as the promotion of information, trade and commerce, technology and friendly relations. Seasoned diplomats of international repute are used in international organisations (e.g. United Nations) as well as multinational companies for their experience in management and negotiating skills. Diplomats are members of foreign services and diplomatic corps of various nations of the world. Diplomats are the oldest form of any of the foreign policy institutions of the state, predating by centuries foreign ministers and ministerial offices. They usually have diplomatic immunity. Contents 1 Etymology 2 Career diplomats and political appointees 3 Diplomatic ranks 4 Function 4.1 Advocacy 4.2 Negotiation 5 Training 6 Status and public image 7 Psychology and loyalty 8 References 9 External links Etymology[edit] Diplomat is derived from the Greek διπλωμάτης (diplōmátēs), the holder of a diploma (a folded paper, literally a "folding"), referring in this case not to an educational certificate but to a diplomat's letters of accreditation, which enable him or her to carry out duties on behalf of one country or institution within the jurisdiction of another country or institution. Career diplomats and political appointees[edit] Though any person can be appointed by a state's national government to conduct said state's relations with other states or international organizations, a number of states maintain an institutionalized group of career diplomats—that is, public servants with a steady professional connection to the country's foreign ministry. The term career diplomat is used world-wide[1][2][3][4][5][6][2][7][8] in opposition to political appointees (that is, people from any other professional backgrounds who may equally be designated by an official government to act as diplomats abroad).[9][10] While officially posted to an embassy or delegation in a foreign country or accredited to an international organization, both career diplomats and political appointees enjoy the same diplomatic immunities. Diplomatic ranks[edit] Main article: Diplomatic rank Whether being a career diplomat or a political appointee, every diplomat, while posted abroad, will be classified in one of the ranks of diplomats (secretary, counselor, minister, ambassador, envoy, or chargé d'affaires) as regulated by international law (namely, by the Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations of 1961). Diplomats can be contrasted with consuls and attachés, who represent their state in a number of administrative ways, but who don't have the diplomat's political functions. Function[edit] Diplomats in posts collect and report information that could affect national interests, often with advice about how the home-country government should respond. Then, once any policy response has been decided in the home country's capital, posts bear major responsibility for implementing it. Diplomats have the job of conveying, in the most persuasive way possible, the views of the home government to the governments to which they are accredited and, in doing so, of trying to convince those governments to act in ways that suit home-country interests. In this way, diplomats are part of the beginning and the end of each loop in the continuous process through which foreign policy develops. In general, it has become harder for diplomats to act autonomously. Diplomats have to seize secure communication systems, emails and mobile telephones can be tracked down and instruct the most reclusive head of mission. The same technology in reverse gives diplomats the capacity for more immediate input about the policy-making processes in the home capital. Secure email has transformed the contact between diplomats and the ministry. It is less likely to leak, and enables more personal contact than the formal cablegram, with its wide distribution and impersonal style. Advocacy[edit] This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (November 2015) The home country will usually send instructions to a diplomatic post on what foreign policy goals to pursue, but decisions on tactics – who needs to be influenced, what will best persuade them, who are potential allies and adversaries, and how it can be done - are for the diplomats overseas to make. In this operation, the intelligence, integrity, cultural understanding and energy of individual diplomats become critical. If competent, they will have developed relationships grounded in trust and mutual understanding with influential members of the country in which they are accredited. They will have worked hard to understand the motives, thought patterns and culture of the other side. Negotiation[edit] This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (November 2015) The diplomat should be an excellent negotiator but, above all, a catalyst for peace and understanding between peoples'. The diplomat's principal role is to foster peaceful relations between states. This role takes on heightened importance if war breaks out. Negotiation must necessarily continue – but within significantly altered contexts. Training[edit] Most career diplomats have university degrees in international relations, political science, economics, or law.[11] Status and public image[edit] Diplomats have generally been considered members of an exclusive and prestigious profession. The public image of diplomats has been described as "a caricature of pinstriped men gliding their way around a never-ending global cocktail party".[12] J. W. Burton has noted that "despite the absence of any specific professional training, diplomacy has a high professional status, due perhaps to a degree of secrecy and mystery that its practitioners self-consciously promote."[13] The state supports the high status, privileges and self-esteem of its diplomats in order to support its own international status and position. The high regard for diplomats is also due to most countries' conspicuous selection of diplomats, with regard to their professionalism and ability to behave according to a certain etiquette, in order to effectively promote their interests. Also, international law grants diplomats extensive privileges and immunities, which further distinguishes the diplomat from the status of an ordinary citizen. Psychology and loyalty[edit] Further information: Clientitis While posted overseas, there is a danger that diplomats may become disconnected from their own country and culture. Sir Harold Nicolson acknowledged that diplomats can become "denationalised, internationalised and therefore dehydrated, an elegant empty husk".[14] References[edit] ^ http://www.independentdiplomat.org/about-us/our-staff/paul-whiteway ^ a b "Career diplomat Aurescu becomes Romanian new FM". xinhuanet.com. Retrieved 18 November 2015.  ^ http://www.theaustralian.com.au/national-affairs/career-diplomat-margaret-twomey-is-new-fiji-high-commissioner/story-fn59niix-1227108642256?nk=48a1c6a6c609bdff015a69446f78632f ^ http://www.nytimes.com/2014/08/02/world/europe/john-f-tefft-a-career-diplomat-will-go-to-russia.html?_r=0 ^ http://www.wto.org/english/news_e/news12_e/biography_robertoazevedo_brazil_e.pdf ^ "Carlos dos santos The Career Diplomat That Nurtured Foreign Affairs in Mozambique - International Magazine Kreol". International Magazine Kreol. Retrieved 18 November 2015.  ^ "BBC NEWS - Asia-Pacific - Princess trapped by palace guard". bbc.co.uk. Retrieved 18 November 2015.  ^ "BBC News - Lady Ashton takes flak in EU diplomatic battle". bbc.co.uk. Retrieved 18 November 2015.  ^ ABC News. "Career Diplomats Worried About Influx of Political Appointees at State Department". ABC News. Retrieved 18 November 2015.  ^ "Are Political Appointees the Only U.S. Diplomats Who Haven't Been to the Country to Which They Are Assigned?". The Huffington Post. Retrieved 18 November 2015.  ^ Stuart Seldowitz, "The Psychology of Diplomatic Conflict Resolution", in H. J. Langholtz and C. E.Stout, Eds. The Psychology of Diplomacy (Westport: Praeger, 2004), pp. 47–58. ^ Allan Gyngell and Michael Wesley, Making Australian Foreign Policy (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2003), pp. 106. ^ J. W. Burton, Systems, States, Diplomacy and Rules (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1968), p. 206. ^ Harold Nicolson, The Evolution of Diplomacy (New York: Collier, 1962) at 107. External links[edit] Media related to Diplomats at Wikimedia Commons v t e Diplomacy and diplomats Roles Diplomatic leader titles Multilateral Permanent representative United Nations Ambassador-at-Large Resident Representative Bilateral-national Ambassador High Commissioner Nuncio Chargé d'affaires Head of mission Deputy Chief of Mission Bilateral-subnational Consul Bilateral-insular Resident Resident Commissioner Envoy Agent-General By portfolio (Attaché) Agricultural attaché Air attaché Chargé de mission Conseiller Chargé des Investissements Cultural attaché Military attaché Science attaché Trade commissioner Other roles Diplomatic courier Queen's Messenger Foreign minister Classification Diplomatic rank Offices Apostolic Nunciature Consular corps Consulate De facto embassy Diplomatic corps Diplomatic mission High Commission Legation Protecting power Types Checkbook diplomacy Coercive diplomacy Commercial diplomacy Cultural diplomacy Defence diplomacy Digital diplomacy Dollar diplomacy Freelance diplomacy Full Spectrum Diplomacy Guerrilla diplomacy Gunboat diplomacy New diplomacy Panda diplomacy Paradiplomacy Pilgrimage diplomacy Ping-pong diplomacy Preventive diplomacy Public diplomacy Shuttle diplomacy Stadium diplomacy Topics Appeasement Consular assistance Consular immunity Diplomatic accreditation Diplomatic bag Diplomatic cable Diplomatic credentials Diplomatic history Diplomatic illness Diplomatic immunity Diplomatic law Diplomatic rank Diplomatic service Diplomatic uniform Protocol Documents Exequatur Letter of credence Letter of protest Other topics Development aid Agencies Parliamentary delegation Summit (meeting) Twin towns and sister cities Category Commons International relations portal Authority control GND: 4012401-0 NDL: 00562105 Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Diplomat&oldid=698666757" Categories: Diplomacy Foreign policy Diplomats Hidden categories: Articles needing additional references from November 2015 All articles needing additional references Commons category with local link same as on Wikidata Wikipedia articles with GND identifiers Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Article Talk Variants Views Read Edit View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Featured content Current events Random article Donate to Wikipedia Wikipedia store Interaction Help About Wikipedia Community portal Recent changes Contact page Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Cite this page Print/export Create a book Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Languages Alemannisch العربية বাংলা Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца)‎ Български Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Español فارسی Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Italiano עברית Қазақша Lietuvių Македонски Монгол Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Олык марий Oʻzbekcha/ўзбекча Plattdüütsch Polski Română Русский Scots Shqip Slovenčina Slovenščina Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Svenska ไทย Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links This page was last modified on 7 January 2016, at 14:43. Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view