Flag of Devon - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Flag of Devon From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to: navigation, search Devon Name Saint Petroc's flag Adopted October 2006 (by county council) Designed by Ryan Sealey The Flag of Devon is the flag of the English county of Devon. It is dedicated to Saint Petroc,[1] a local saint with numerous dedications throughout the West Country and particularly in Devon. It is notable for its creation through two web-based polls.[2][3] Contents 1 History 2 Flying the Flag 3 Controversy 4 References History[edit] The subject of a Devonian flag was raised by the county's contingent of scouts to the 20th World Scout Jamboree in an interview on BBC Radio Devon in 2002. The scouts were unaware of a Devon flag and wondered if any of the listeners knew of a flag for the county. BBC Radio Devon took up the search for a flag for Devon and asked the public to send in designs. The flag was created in 2003 after a vote in two polls run by the BBC Devon website, the winning design taking 49% of the votes cast. The design was created by student Ryan Sealey.[3] The Devon Flag is made of three colours — green (Pantone 348), black and white.[1] Although the flag is relatively young, its colours are those traditionally identified with Devon[3] (e.g. the colours of its Rugby Union team, Exeter University and Plymouth Argyle F.C.). Lord Exmouth flew a dark green flag with white circles at the Bombardment of Algiers (now on view at the Teign Valley Museum).[citation needed] The green represents the colour of the rolling and lush Devon hills, the black represents the high and windswept moors (Dartmoor and Exmoor) and the white represents both the salt spray of Devon's two coastlines and the China Clay industry (and mining in general).[4] Since its launch in 2003, the Devon Flag has gained popularity, and in October 2006 it gained "official" recognition when Devon County Council raised the flag outside County Hall.[5] In April 2004, Rodney Lock of Ottery St Mary in East Devon was threatened with legal action for flying the Devon flag in his back garden, as he required planning permission to fly non-national flags. Since then the Minister for Housing, Keith Hill, has said local authorities can officially "turn a blind eye" to the practice of flying the county flag from poles.[6] Flying the Flag[edit] The Devon Flag Group have suggested the following dates as days when it is appropriate for the Devon flag to be flown. Most of them are either the days of local events or the feast days of Devon's saints. It is also flown outside of these days, especially in rural towns.[7] 4 January - St Rumon of Tavistock and Romansleigh 7 January - St Brannock of Braunton 5 March - St Piran, patron saint of tin miners 7 April - St Brannock, as celebrated in Exeter May Bank Holiday, Anniversary of first time Devon Flag Flown at World Gig Championship 2003, Isles of Scilly May/June - Devon County Show 3 June - St Kevin 4 June - St Petroc, for whom the flag is dedicated 5 June - St Boniface of Crediton 6 June - St Gudwal, hermit of Devon 17 June - St Nectan, patron of Hartland 21/22 June - Midsummers day 26 June - St Brannock - another feast day 8 July - St Urith 13 July - St Juthware 30 July - Anniversary of battle against Spanish Armada 1 August - St Sidwell, virgin of Exeter 10 August - St Geraint of Dumnonia 30 August - St Rumon 26 September - Anniversary of Sir Francis Drake's Circumnavigation of the World 2 November - St Cumgar 5 November - St Kea 7 November - St Congar 8 December - St Budoc (St Budeaux) of Plymouth 12 December - St Corentin 21/22 December - Midwinter 31 Dec to 6 Jan - New Year's Eve to Twelfth Night Controversy[edit] The creation of the flag drew criticism from Cornish nationalists, who accused it online of being an attempt to "hijack" their culture.[8] Bob Burns, who started the discussion over a flag for Devon, cited the visibility of the Cornish Flag as one of his reasons "Devonians are only too aware of the ubiquitous Cornish Flag, which can often be seen in the form of car bumper stickers, on vehicles entering Devon from Cornwall."[3] Dr Mark Stoyle, a Devon historian, noted that "People are quite aware in Devon that the Cornish make political capital by claiming to be different." He also suggested that the new-found sense of Devonian identity was a backlash against incoming "city-dwellers settling in the South West".[8] References[edit] ^ a b The Flag Institute ^ "Devon, England". Flags of the world. 21 October 2011. Retrieved 25 January 2014.  ^ a b c d "Flag celebrates Devon's heritage". BBC Devon website. January 2005. Retrieved 25 January 2014.  ^ "Devon Flag Group". Devon County Council website. Retrieved 4 February 2015.  ^ "Devon Flag". Devon County Council website. Retrieved 25 January 2014.  ^ "Council's told they can "turn a blind eye" to flag flying". BBC Devon website. December 2004. Retrieved 25 January 2014.  ^ "When to fly the flag". Devon County Council website. Retrieved 25 January 2014.  ^ a b "New Flag Causes A Flap in South West". BBC Devon website. Retrieved 13 September 2008.  v t e Ceremonial county of Devon Devon Portal Unitary authorities Plymouth Torbay Boroughs or districts Exeter East Devon Mid Devon North Devon Torridge West Devon South Hams Teignbridge Major settlements Ashburton Axminster Bampton Barnstaple Bideford Bovey Tracey Bradninch Brixham Buckfastleigh Budleigh Salterton Chagford Chudleigh Chulmleigh Colyton Crediton Cullompton Dartmouth Dawlish Exeter Exmouth Great Torrington Hartland Hatherleigh Holsworthy Honiton Ilfracombe Ivybridge Kingsbridge Kingsteignton Lynton Modbury Moretonhampstead Newton Abbot North Tawton Northam Okehampton Ottery St Mary Paignton Plymouth Plympton Salcombe Seaton Sidmouth South Brent South Molton Tavistock Teignmouth Tiverton Torquay Totnes See also: List of civil parishes in Devon Rivers Ashburn Avon Axe Barle Bovey Bray Burn Clyst Creedy Culm Dart East Dart West Dart Erme Exe Heddon Lemon Lew Lumburn Lyd East Lyn West Lyn Meavy Mole Okement East Okement West Okement Otter Plym Sid Swincombe Tamar Tavy Taw Teign Thrushel Torridge Walkham Wallabrooke East Webburn West Webburn Wolf Yealm Topics Flag Devon County Council Parliamentary constituencies Economy Places Towns by population SSSIs Country houses Grade I listed buildings Grade II* listed buildings Bridges History Schools Museums Lord Lieutenants High Sheriffs Notable people Dartmoor Exmoor Jurassic Coast South West Coast Path North Devon's Biosphere Reserve v t e Subnational flags of the United Kingdom England (list) Bedfordshire Berkshire Birmingham Black Country Buckinghamshire Cambridgeshire Cheshire Cornwall Cumberland Derbyshire Devon Dorset County Durham East Anglia Essex Gloucestershire Greater Manchester Herefordshire Hertfordshire Huntingdonshire Isles of Scilly Isle of Wight Kent Lancashire Lincolnshire City of London Mercia Middlesex Northamptonshire Northumberland Northumbria Nottinghamshire Oxfordshire Plymouth Rutland Shropshire Somerset Staffordshire Surrey Sussex Wessex Westmorland Wiltshire Worcestershire Yorkshire (East, North & West Ridings) Northern Ireland (list)   Scotland (list) Caithness Orkney Shetland Wales (list) Anglesey Caernarfonshire Flintshire Glamorgan Merionethshire Monmouthshire Montgomeryshire Pembrokeshire Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Flag_of_Devon&oldid=693151045" Categories: Flags of places in England Local government in Devon Flags adopted through competition Flags of saints Flags with crosses 2006 introductions Hidden categories: All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from January 2014 Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Article Talk Variants Views Read Edit View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Featured content Current events Random article Donate to Wikipedia Wikipedia store Interaction Help About Wikipedia Community portal Recent changes Contact page Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Cite this page Print/export Create a book Download as PDF Printable version Languages Brezhoneg Esperanto فارسی Nederlands Polski 中文 Edit links This page was last modified on 30 November 2015, at 19:26. Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view