Flag of England - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Flag of England From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to: navigation, search England Use Civil and state flag Proportion 3:5[1] Adopted 1191 Design Argent, a cross gules, i.e. a red centred cross on a white background The flag of England flying alongside the flag of the United Kingdom in Southsea, Portsmouth, in July 2008 The flag of England is derived from St George's Cross (heraldic blazon: Argent, a cross gules). The association of the red cross as an emblem of England can be traced back to the Middle Ages, and it was used as a component in the design of the Union Flag in 1606.[2] Since the 1990s it has been in increasingly wide use, particularly at national sporting events. Contents 1 Origins 2 Derived flags 2.1 Union Flag 2.2 City of London 2.3 Royal Navy 3 Contemporary use 3.1 Church of England 3.2 Sporting events 3.3 English nationalism 4 Outside England 4.1 Canada 4.2 Channel Islands 4.3 Elsewhere 5 See also 6 References 7 External links Origins Further information: Saint George's Cross and Flag of Genoa Saint George seen in the act of slaying the dragon. He is depicted wearing a jupon displaying the St George's Cross. Paolo Uccello (c. 1460) Illustration of the St. George's Cross used alongside the Royal Standard by Wat Tyler's rebels. Froissart's Chronicles BL Royal 18 E.I, fol. 165v, c. 1470. In 1188 Henry II of England and Philip II of France agreed to go on a crusade, and that Henry would use a white cross and Philip a red cross. 13th-century authorities are unanimous on the point that the English king adopted the white cross, and the French king the red one (and not vice versa as suggested by later use). It is not clear at what point the English exchanged the white cross for the red-on-white one. There was a historiographical tradition claiming that Richard the Lionheart himself adopted both the flag and the patron saint from Genoa at some point during his crusade. This idea can be traced to the Victorian era,[3] Perrin (1922) refers to it as a "common belief", and it is still popularly repeated today even though it cannot be substantiated as historical.[4] On the origins of the flag and its connection to the Genoese flag the Duke of Kent remarked in 1992: "The St. George's flag, a red cross on a white field, was adopted by England and the City of London in 1190 for their ships entering the Mediterranean to benefit from the protection of the Genoese fleet. The English Monarch paid an annual tribute to the Doge of Genoa for this privilege."[5][6][7] HRH The Duke of Kent Red crosses seem to have been used as a distinguishing mark worn by English soldiers from the reign of Edward I (1270s),[8] or perhaps slightly earlier, in the Battle of Evesham of 1265, using a red cross on their uniforms to distinguish themselves from the white crosses used by the rebel barons at the Battle of Lewes a year earlier.[9] Perrin (1922:37) notes a roll of accounts from 1277 where the purchase of cloth for the king's tailor is identified as destined for the manufacture of a large number of pennoncels (pennons attached to lances) and bracers (worn by archers on their left forearms) "of the arms of Saint George" for the use by the king's foot soldiers (pro peditibus regis). Perrin concludes from this that the introduction of the Cross of St George as a "national emblem" is originally due to Edward I. By 1300, there was also a greater "banner of St George", but not yet in a prominent function; the king used it among several banners of saints alongside the royal banner.[10] Saint George had become popular as a "warrior saint" during the crusades, but the saint most closely associated with England was Edward the Confessor until the time of Edward III, who in thanks for Saint George's supposed intervention in his favour at the Battle of Crécy gave him a special position as a patron saint of the Order of the Garter in 1348.[11] From that time, his banner was used with increasing prominence alongside the Royal Banner and became a fixed element in the hoist of the Royal Standard. The flag shown for England in the Book of All Kingdoms of 1367 is solid red (while St. George's Cross is shown for Nice and, in a five-cross version, for Tblisi). John Cabot, commissioned by Henry VII to sail "under our banners, flags and ensigns," reportedly took St. George's banner to Newfoundland in 1497.[citation needed] St George's Day was considered a "double major feast" from 1415,[12] but George was still eclipsed by his "rivals" Saints Edward and Edmund. He finally rose to the position of the primary patron saint of England during the English Reformation, with the revised prayer book of 1552, when all religious flags, including all saints' banners except for his were abolished.[13] The first recorded use of St. George's Cross as a maritime flag, in conjunction with royal banners, dates to 1545.[dubious – discuss][1] In 1606 it was combined with the Scottish St. Andrew's Cross to form the Union Jack. The concept of a national flag, as opposed to royal banners, naval ensigns or military flags, developed in the late 18th century, following the American and French Revolutions. In the 19th century, it became desirable for all nations of Europe (and later worldwide) to identify a national flag. Since during that time, the terms Britain and England were used largely interchangeably, the Union Flag was used as national flag de facto, even though never officially adopted. The observation that the Cross of St. George is the "national flag of England" (as opposed to the Union Flag being the flag of all of the United Kingdom) was made in the context of Irish irredentism, as noted by G.K. Chesterton in 1933, "As a very sensible Irishman said in a letter to a Dublin paper: 'The Union Jack is not the national flag of England.' The national flag of England is the Cross of St. George; and that, oddly enough, was splashed from one end of Dublin to the other; it was mostly displayed on shield-shaped banners, and may have been regarded by many as merely religious"[14] Derived flags Union Flag Further information: Flag of the Kingdom of Great Britain The flag of England is one of the key components of the Union Flag. The Union Flag has been used in a variety of forms since the proclamation by Orders in Council 1606,[15][16] when the flags of Scotland and England were first merged to symbolise the Union of the Crowns.[17] (The Union of the Crowns having occurred in 1603). In Scotland, and in particular on Scottish vessels at sea, historical evidence suggests that a separate design of Union Flag was flown to that used in England.[18] In the Acts of Union of 1707, which united the Kingdom of Scotland and the Kingdom of England to become the Kingdom of Great Britain, it was declared that "the Crosses of St. George and St. Andrew be conjoined, in such Manner as her Majesty shall think fit, and used in all Flags, Banners, Standards and Ensigns, both at Sea and Land."[19] From 1801, in order to symbolise the union of the Kingdom of Great Britain with the Kingdom of Ireland, a new design which included the St Patrick's Cross was adopted for the flag of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland.[20] The Flag of the United Kingdom, having remained unchanged following the partition of Ireland in 1921 and creation of the Irish Free State and Northern Ireland, continues to be used as the flag of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland. The Saint George's Cross. In the Union Flag this represents the entire Kingdom of England, including Wales. The English version of the First Union Flag, 1606, used mostly in England and, from 1707, the flag of the Kingdom of Great Britain. The Scottish version of the First Union Flag saw limited use in Scotland from 1606 to 1707, following the Union of the Crowns. The Second Union Flag, 1801, incorporating Cross of Saint Patrick, following Union of Great Britain and Kingdom of Ireland. City of London Flag of the City of London The White Ensign of the United Kingdom, consisting of the flag of Saint George, defaced with the Union Flag in the first quarter The flag of the City of London is based on the English flag, having a centred St George's Cross on a white background, with a red sword in the upper hoist canton (the top left quarter). The sword is believed to represent the sword that beheaded Saint Paul who is the patron saint of the city.[21] Royal Navy The flag used by the British Royal Navy (the White Ensign) is also based on the flag of England, consisting of the St George's Cross and a Union Flag in the canton. In addition to the United Kingdom, several countries in the Commonwealth of Nations also have variants of the White Ensign with their own national flags in the canton, with the St George's Cross sometimes being replaced by a naval badge.[22] Contemporary use Flag flying on Leeds Town Hall (2009). Church of England Churches belonging to the Church of England (unless for special reasons another flag is flown by custom) may fly St George's Cross. The correct way (since an order from the Earl Marshal in 1938) is for the church to fly the St George's cross, with the arms of the diocese in the left-hand upper corner of the flag.[23] Sporting events English Rugby team supporter waving the English flag in the streets of Nantes, France in 2007. The flag is also seen during other sporting events in which England competes, for example during England Cricket matches (the Cricket World Cup and The Ashes), during Rugby Union matches[24] and in football.[25] It is also used in icons on the Internet and on the TV screen to represent teams and players from England. Before 1996, most of the flags waved by supporters were Union Flags. It is now observed that most are England flags.[26] In a sporting context, the flag is often seen being waved by supporters with the unofficial addition of the word 'England' across its horizontal bar. English nationalism As the national flag of England, the St George's cross is also used in English nationalism in conscious distinction from the Union Flag. This is parallel to, but less widely practiced, than the use of the flag of Scotland as distinct from the Union Flag in Scottish nationalism. While the flag of Scotland has been officially defined by the Scottish Parliament in 2003, the flag of England does not figure in any official legislation, and its use by English nationalists was for some time limited to the "far-right", notably the British National Party (founded 1982). Since the flag's widespread use in sporting events since the mid-1990s, the association with far-right nationalism has waned, and the flag is now frequently flown throughout the country both privately and by local authorities,[27] although it also remains in use by nationalist groups such as the English Defence League (founded 2009). Outside England See also: St George's Cross Due to the spread of the British Empire, the flag of England is currently, and was formerly used on various flags and coats of arms of different countries, states and provinces throughout the territories of the British Empire. The St. George's Cross is also used as the city flag of some northern Italian cities, such as Milan and Bologna. Canada Flag of Alberta Flag of Canada (1868–1921) Flag of Manitoba Flag of Montreal, Quebec Flag of Ontario Flag of Yukon Channel Islands Flag of Alderney, Guernsey Flag of Guernsey Flag of Herm, Guernsey Flag of Sark, Guernsey Elsewhere Royal Standard of Australia Naval Ensign of Barbados Flag of the East India Company (1600–1707) Flag of Fiji Colonial Flag of Jamaica Royal Standard of Jamaica Flag of the Loyalist Volunteer Force Lower Murray River Flag Flag of New South Wales, Australia Flag of the Governor of New South Wales, Australia Flag of Prince George's County, Maryland, United States Ulster Banner (Northern Ireland) Former flag of the Governor of Northern Ireland Flag of the Orange Order Flag of Saint Helena Flag of the Governor of Saint Helena Flag of the United Tribes of New Zealand See also Culture of England History People Languages Traditions Fête Country clothing Morris Dancing Public house Mythology and folklore Mythology folklore Cuisine Festivals Saint George's Day Guy Fawkes Night May Day Lady Day Plough Monday Plough Sunday Harvest Festival Religion Art Literature Music and performing arts Music Performing arts Media Radio Television Cinema Newspapers Magazines Sport Badminton Cricket Croquet Field hockey Football Netball Rugby Lawn tennis Table tennis Lawn bowls Monuments World Heritage Sites Symbols Flag Coat of arms Tudor rose Barbary lion Oak tree St George English inventions and discoveries England portal v t e Royal Banner of England Royal coat of arms of England List of English flags List of British flags Saint Patrick's Flag Tudor Rose Flags of Europe St George's Day in England References ^ a b England (United Kingdom); Flags of the World; (c.1996 - Present) ^ Suchenia, Agnieszka (13 March 2013), The Union Flag and Flags of the United Kingdom (PDF), House of Commons Library, pp. 6—8  ^ e.g. "Richard Coeur de Lion embarked on Genoese galleys under their banner of the Red Cross and the flag of St. George, which he brought home to become the patron of Old England" The Journal of the Manchester Geographical Society, Volumes 7-8, 1891, p. 139. There are variants; in another version Richard is impressed with the Genoese at Acre. ^ "I have been unable to find any solid ground for the common belief that the cross of St George was introduced as the national emblem of England by Richard I, and am of opinion that it did not begin to attain that position until the first years of the reign of Edward I." Perrin, British Flags, 1922, p. 15 ^ Prince Edward, Duke of Kent in a bilingual preface to a brochure made for the British Pavilion at Genoa Expo '92 Franco Bampi. "Benvenuti al Padiglione Britannico!". Francobampi.it. Retrieved 2016-04-25.  ^ "Australian Flag - 21/04/1993 - ADJ - NSW Parliament". www.parliament.nsw.gov.au. Retrieved 2016-04-25.  ^ "Genoa (Liguria, Italy)". www.crwflags.com. Retrieved 2016-04-25.  ^ Perrin, British Flags, p. 37 ^ Curry, Anne (2000). The Battle of Agincourt: Sources and Interpretations. Boydell Press. p. 275. ISBN 978-0-85115-802-0 ^ "Among the greater banners that of St George was not as yet supreme; it was indeed only one of four, for when the Castle of Carlaverock was taken in the year 1300: Puis fist le roy porter amont / Sa baniere et la Seint Eymont / La Seint George et la Seint Edwart [...]" Perrin 1922, p. 37 ^ "The first step towards the promotion of St George to a position of predominance seems to be due to Edward III, who in gratitude for his supposed help at the Battle of Cregy founded the Chapel of St George at Windsor in 1348." Perrin 1922, pp. 37f. ^ it was first introduced as a minor feast day observed in the Church of England in 1222, but its omission from later lists suggests that it was not universally adopted. Perrin, p. 38. ^ "When the Prayer Book was revised under Edward VI (1547–1553), the festival of St. George was abolished, with many others. Under the influence of the Reformation the banners of his former rivals, St Edward and St Edmund, together with all other religious flags in public use, except that of St George, entirely disappeared, and their place was taken by banners containing royal badges." W. G. Perrin, British Flags, Cambridge University Press: (1922), p. 40. ^ Gilbert Keith Chesterton, Christendom in Dublin (1933), p. 9. ^ Fox-Davies, Arthur Charles (1904) [1986]. The Art of Heraldry: An Encyclopædia of Armory. London: Bloomsbury Books. p. 399. ISBN 0-906223-34-2.  ^ Royal Website ^ Flag Institute ^ Flags of the World ^ Act of Union (Article 1) ^ Flags of the World ^ City of London, Britishflags.net ^ "United Kingdom: history of the British ensigns". Fotw.net. Retrieved 2010-04-11.  ^ Church of England - Use of the flag; Flags of the World; 23 October 2008 ^ England Rugby Football Union ^ 2010 FIFA World Cup ^ "The Saturday Soap Box: We have to make Jerusalem England's national anthem". Daily Mirror. 2005-09-17. Archived from the original on 2006-10-11. Retrieved 2006-11-01.  ^ Conn, David; Sour English stereotypes linger amid the flag-waving; The Guardian; 12 July 2006 External links Wikimedia Commons has media related to Flags of England. "United Kingdom Flag History". Retrieved 11 July 2011.  Flag of England at FOTW   Links to related articles v t e Flags of the United Kingdom United Kingdom   Flag of the United Kingdom (1801–present) Countries of the United Kingdom   England   Scotland   Wales  Northern Ireland Banners   Royal Standard of the United Kingdom (1801–present)   Royal Standard of the United Kingdom in Scotland (1801–present)   Royal Banner of Scotland (1222–present) Historic   Flag of Great Britain (1707–1801)   Royal Standard of Great Britain (1707–1801)   Royal Banner of England (1198–1707)   Flags used during the Interregnum (1649–1660)   Royal Standard of Ireland (1541–1800)   Ireland within the UK (1801–1922)   Northern Ireland (1953–1972) Ensigns   Blue Ensign   Red Ensign   White Ensign   Green Ensign   Royal Air Force Ensign   Civil Air Ensign v t e Subnational flags of the United Kingdom England (list) Bedfordshire Berkshire Birmingham Black Country Buckinghamshire Cambridgeshire Cheshire Cornwall Cumberland Derbyshire Devon Dorset County Durham East Anglia Essex Gloucestershire Greater Manchester Herefordshire Hertfordshire Huntingdonshire Isles of Scilly Isle of Wight Kent Lancashire Lincolnshire City of London Mercia Middlesex Northamptonshire Northumberland Northumbria Nottinghamshire Oxfordshire Plymouth Rutland Shropshire Somerset Staffordshire Surrey Sussex Wessex Westmorland Wiltshire Worcestershire Yorkshire (East, North & West Ridings) Northern Ireland (list)   Scotland (list) Caithness Orkney Shetland Wales (list) Anglesey Caernarfonshire Flintshire Glamorgan Merionethshire Monmouthshire Montgomeryshire Pembrokeshire v t e Flags of Europe Sovereign states Albania Andorra Armenia Austria Azerbaijan Belarus Belgium Bosnia and Herzegovina Bulgaria Croatia Cyprus Czech Republic Denmark Estonia Finland France Georgia Germany Greece Hungary Iceland Ireland Italy Kazakhstan Latvia Liechtenstein Lithuania Luxembourg Macedonia Malta Moldova Monaco Montenegro Netherlands Norway Poland Portugal Romania Russia San Marino Serbia Slovakia Slovenia Spain Sweden Switzerland Turkey Ukraine United Kingdom England Northern Ireland Scotland Wales Vatican City States with limited recognition Abkhazia Kosovo Nagorno-Karabakh Republic Northern Cyprus South Ossetia Transnistria Dependencies and other territories Åland Faroe Islands Gibraltar Guernsey Jersey Isle of Man Svalbard Other entities European Union Sovereign Military Order of Malta v t e National flags and coats of arms National flags Sovereign states Dependent territories Timeline National coats of arms Sovereign states Dependent territories v t e England articles History Overviews Timeline Education Local government Maritime Military Social Chronology Prehistoric Roman Britain Lloegyr Anglo-Saxon England Heptarchy Kingdom of England Norman conquest Angevin Empire Wars of the Roses Tudor period Stuart period English Renaissance English Reformation Elizabethan era Jacobean era Civil War Union with Scotland Georgian era Regency Victorian era Edwardian period The Blitz Geography Counties Districts Gardens Islands Parishes Places Regions Towns Politics Economy Middle Ages Elizabethan government Independence Monarchy Parliament Culture Anglophilia Castles Country clothing Cuisine Demographics Education Folklore Fête Landscape garden Identity Innovations and discoveries English language in England Museums People list Religion Church of England Afternoon Tea Sport Cricket national team Football The Football Association national team Rugby league Rugby Football League national team Rugby union Rugby Football Union national team Wimbledon Symbols Coat of arms Flags national flag Heraldry Oak tree Royal Standards Royal Supporters St. George St George's Day Tudor Rose Outline Book Category Portal WikiProject Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Flag_of_England&oldid=717045714" Categories: Flags of England Flags of the United Kingdom National symbols of England Red and white flags Hidden categories: All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from April 2013 All accuracy disputes Articles with disputed statements from April 2013 Commons category with local link same as on Wikidata Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Article Talk Variants Views Read View source View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Featured content Current events Random article Donate to Wikipedia Wikipedia store Interaction Help About Wikipedia Community portal Recent changes Contact page Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Cite this page Print/export Create a book Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Languages Afrikaans Ænglisc العربية Azərbaycanca Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца)‎ Български Brezhoneg Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Հայերեն Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia עברית Kiswahili Lietuvių Magyar Македонски Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Polski Português Română Русский Scots Shqip Slovenčina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska ไทย Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt Yorùbá 中文 Edit links This page was last modified on 25 April 2016, at 12:00. Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view