German language - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia German language From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia   (Redirected from Duits) Jump to: navigation, search For other uses of "Deutsch", see Deutsch (disambiguation). "Duits" redirects here. It is not to be confused with Duit. German Deutsch, deutsche Sprache Pronunciation [ˈdɔʏtʃ] Native to primarily German-speaking Europe, also in the worldwide German diaspora Native speakers 90 million (2010)[1] to 95 million (2014)[2] L2 speakers: 10–15 million (2014)[2][3] as a foreign language: 75–100 million[2] Language family Indo-European Germanic West Germanic German Standard forms German Standard German Swiss Standard German Austrian Standard German Writing system Latin (German alphabet) German Braille Signed forms Signed German, LBG (Lautsprachbegleitende / Lautbegleitende Gebärden) Official status Official language in 6 countries Austria Belgium Germany Liechtenstein Luxembourg Switzerland 3 dependencies South Tyrol (Italy) 31 communes in Poland 9 municipalities in Brazil Several international institutions Recognised minority language in 13 countries (minority/cultural/national language) Brazil (Espírito Santo) Bosnia and Herzegovina Czech Republic Denmark Hungary Italy (Friuli-Venezia Giulia, Trentino, Piedmont & Valle d'Aosta) Kazakhstan Namibia Poland Romania Russia (Azov German National District) Slovakia Ukraine Regulated by No official regulation (German orthography regulated by the Council for German Orthography[4]). Language codes ISO 639-1 de ISO 639-2 ger (B) deu (T) ISO 639-3 Variously: deu – German gmh – Middle High German goh – Old High German gct – Alemán Coloniero bar – Austro-Bavarian cim – Cimbrian geh – Hutterite German ksh – Kölsch nds – Low German[a] sli – Lower Silesian ltz – Luxembourgish[b] vmf – Main-Franconian mhn – Mócheno pfl – Palatinate German pdc – Pennsylvania German pdt – Plautdietsch[c] swg – Swabian German gsw – Swiss German uln – Unserdeutsch sxu – Upper Saxon wae – Walser German wep – Westphalian hrx – Riograndenser Hunsrückisch yec – Yenish Glottolog high1287  (High Franconian)[6] uppe1397  (Upper German)[7] Linguasphere   further information 52-AC (Continental West Germanic) > 52-ACB (Deutsch & Dutch) > 52-ACB-d (Central German incl. 52-ACB–dl & -dm Standard/Generalised High German) + 52-ACB-e & -f (Upper German & Swiss German) + 52-ACB-h (émigré German varieties incl. 52-ACB-hc Hutterite German & 52-ACB-he Pennsylvania German etc.) + 52-ACB-i (Yenish); Totalling 285 varieties: 52-ACB-daa to 52-ACB-i   (Co-)Official and majority language   Co-official, but not majority language   Statutory minority/cultural language   Non-statutory minority language This article contains IPA phonetic symbols. Without proper rendering support, you may see question marks, boxes, or other symbols instead of Unicode characters. German (Deutsch [ˈdɔʏtʃ] ( listen)) is a West Germanic language that is mainly spoken in Central Europe. It is the most widely spoken and (co-)official language in Germany, Austria, Switzerland, South Tyrol (Italy), and Liechtenstein; it is also an official, but not majority language of Luxembourg and Belgium. Major languages which are most similar to German include other members of the West Germanic language branch, such as Afrikaans, Dutch, and English. One of the major languages of the world, German is the first language of about 95 million people worldwide and the most widely spoken native language in the European Union.[2][8] German also is the third most widely taught foreign language in both the US[9] (after Spanish and French) and the EU (after English and French; at lower secondary level),[10] the second most commonly used scientific language[11] as well as the third most widely used language on websites (after English and Russian).[12] Germany is ranked fifth in terms of annual publication of new books, with one tenth of all books (including e-books) in the world being published in the German language.[13] German derives most of its vocabulary from the Germanic branch of the Indo-European language family.[14] A portion of German words are derived from Latin and Greek, and fewer are borrowed from French and English. With slightly different standardized variants (German, Austrian, and Swiss Standard German), German is a pluricentric language. German is also notable for its broad spectrum of dialects, with many unique varieties existing in Europe and also other parts of the world.[2][15] Due to the limited intelligibility between certain varieties and Standard German, as well as the lack of an undisputed, scientific difference between a "dialect" and a "language",[2] some German varieties or dialect groups (e.g. Low German (Low Saxon) or Plautdietsch[5]) are alternatively referred to as "languages" and "dialects".[16] Contents 1 History 1.1 Origins 1.2 Modern German 1.2.1 Germany 1.2.2 The Austrian Empire 1.2.3 Standardization 2 Geographic distribution 2.1 Europe and Asia 2.1.1 German Sprachraum 2.1.2 Outside the Sprachraum 2.2 Africa 2.2.1 Namibia 2.2.2 South Africa 2.3 North America 2.4 South America 2.4.1 Co-official statuses of German or German varieties in Brazil 2.5 Oceania 2.6 German as a foreign language 3 Standard German 3.1 Varieties of Standard German 4 Dialects 4.1 Low German 4.2 High German 5 Grammar 5.1 Noun inflection 5.2 Verb inflection 5.2.1 Verb prefixes 5.3 Word order 5.3.1 Auxiliary verbs 5.3.2 Modal verbs 5.3.3 Multiple infinitives 6 Vocabulary 7 Orthography 7.1 Present 7.2 Past 7.3 Reform of 1996 8 Phonology 8.1 Vowels 8.2 Consonants 8.2.1 Consonant spellings 8.2.2 Consonant shifts 9 Literature 10 German loanwords in the English language 11 Organisations 11.1 Goethe-Institut 11.2 Verein Deutsche Sprache 11.3 Deutsche Welle 12 See also 13 References 14 Notes 15 Bibliography 16 External links History[edit] Main article: History of German Origins[edit] The Germanic-speaking area of the Holy Roman Empire around AD 962.   Old Frisian (Alt-Friesisch)   Old Saxon (Alt-Sächsisch)   Old Franconian (Alt-Fränkisch)   Old Alemannic (Alt-Alemannisch)   Old Bavarian (Alt-Bairisch) The history of the German language begins with the High German consonant shift during the migration period, which separated Old High German dialects from Old Saxon. The earliest evidence of Old High German is from scattered Elder Futhark inscriptions, especially in Alemannic, from the sixth century AD; the earliest glosses (Abrogans) date to the eighth century; and the oldest coherent texts (the Hildebrandslied, the Muspilli and the Merseburg Incantations[17]) to the ninth century. Old Saxon, at this time, belonged to the North Sea Germanic cultural sphere, and Lower Saxony was to fall under German, rather than Anglo-Frisian, influence during the existence of the Holy Roman Empire. Because Germany was divided into many different states, the only force working for a unification or standardization of German for several hundred years was the general wish of German writers to be understood by as many readers as possible. Modern German[edit] Germany[edit] The widespread popularity of the Bible translated into German by Martin Luther helped establish modern German A contemporary map showing ethnicities in central Europe as of 1880. Note that Niederlande (The Netherlands) is depicted as part of the Nieder-Deutsche (Low Germans). When Martin Luther translated the Bible (the New Testament in 1522 and the Old Testament, published in parts and completed in 1534), he based his translation primarily on the standard bureaucratic language used in Saxony (sächsische Kanzleisprache), also known as Meißner-Deutsch (German from the city of Meissen).[18] This language was based on Eastern Upper and Eastern Central German dialects, and preserved much of the grammatical system of Middle High German, unlike the spoken German dialects in Central and Upper Germany, which had, at that time, already begun to lose the genitive case and the preterite tense. Copies of Luther's Bible featured a long list of glosses for each region that translated words which were unknown in the region into the regional dialect. Roman Catholics initially rejected Luther's translation, and tried to create their own Catholic standard of the German language (gemeines Deutsch) – the difference in relation to "Protestant German" was minimal. It was not until the middle of the 18th century that a widely accepted standard was created, ending the period of Early New High German.[19] Until about 1800, standard German was mainly a written language: in urban northern Germany, the local Low Saxon or Low German dialects were spoken. Standard German, which was markedly different, was often learned as a foreign language with uncertain pronunciation. Northern German pronunciation was considered the standard in prescriptive pronunciation guides; however, the actual pronunciation of Standard German varies from region to region.[20] The Austrian Empire[edit] Ethnolinguistic map of Austria-Hungary, 1910, with German-speaking areas shown in red. German was the language of commerce and government in the Habsburg Empire, which encompassed a large area of Central and Eastern Europe. Until the mid-19th century, it was essentially the language of townspeople throughout most of the Empire. Its use indicated that the speaker was a merchant or someone from an urban area, regardless of nationality. Some cities, such as Prague (German: Prag) and Budapest (Buda, German: Ofen), were gradually Germanized in the years after their incorporation into the Habsburg domain. Others, such as Pozsony (German: Pressburg, now Bratislava), were originally settled during the Habsburg period, and were primarily German at that time. Some cities remained mainly non-German, but most cities, such as Prague, Budapest, Bratislava, Zagreb (German: Agram), and Ljubljana (German: Laibach), were primarily German during this time, despite being surrounded by territory where other languages were spoken. In the eastern provinces of Banat and Transylvania (German: Siebenbürgen), German was the predominant language not only in the larger towns – such as Temeswar (Timișoara), Hermannstadt (Sibiu) and Kronstadt (Brașov) – but also in many smaller localities in the surrounding areas.[21][22] Standardization[edit] The Deutsches Wörterbuch (1854) by the Brothers Grimm helped to standardize German orthography. The most comprehensive guide to the vocabulary of the German language is found within the Deutsches Wörterbuch. This dictionary was created by the Brothers Grimm and is composed of 16 parts which were issued between 1852 and 1860.[23] In 1872, grammatical and orthographic rules first appeared in the Duden Handbook.[24] In 1901, this was declared the standard definition of the German language.[25] In 1901, the 2nd Orthographical Conference ended with a complete standardization of the German language in its written form. The Deutsche Bühnensprache (literally, German stage language) had established conventions for German pronunciation in theatre (Bühnendeutsch[26]) three years earlier; however, this was an artificial standard that did not correspond to any traditional spoken dialect. Rather, it was based on the pronunciation of Standard German in Northern Germany, although it was subsequently regarded often as a general prescriptive norm, despite differing pronunciation traditions especially in the Upper-German-speaking regions that still characterize the dialect of the area today – especially the pronunciation of the ending -ig as [ɪk] instead of [ɪç]. In Northern Germany, Standard German was a foreign language to most inhabitants, whose native dialects were subsets of Low German. It was usually encountered only in writing or formal speech; in fact, most of Standard German was a written language, not identical to any spoken dialect, throughout the German-speaking area until well into the 19th century. Official revisions of some of the rules from 1901 were not issued until the controversial German orthography reform of 1996 was made the official standard by governments of all German-speaking countries.[27] Media and written works are now almost all produced in Standard German (often called Hochdeutsch, "High German") which is understood in all areas where German is spoken. Geographic distribution[edit] Main article: Geographical distribution of German speakers Due to the German diaspora as well as German being the third most widely taught foreign language in the US[9] and the EU[28] amongst others, the geographical distribution of German speakers (or "Germanophones") spans all inhabited continents. As for the number of speakers of any language worldwide, an assessment is always compromised by the lack of sufficient, reliable data. For an exact, global number of native German speakers, this is further complicated by the existence of several varieties whose status as separate "languages" or "dialects" is disputed for political and/or linguistic reasons, including quantitatively strong varieties like certain forms of Alemannic (e.g., Alsatian)[2] and Low German/Plautdietsch.[5] Mostly depending on the inclusion or exclusion of certain varieties, it is estimated that approximately 90–95 million people speak German as a first language,[2][16][29] 10-25 million as a second language,[2][16] and 75–100 million as a foreign language.[2][3] This would imply approximately 175-220 million German speakers worldwide.[30] It is estimated that also including all persons who are or were taking German classes, i.e., regardless of their actual proficiency, would amount to about 280 million people worldwide with at least some knowledge of German.[2] Approximate distribution of native speakers of German or a German variety outside Europe (according to Ethnologue 2015[31] unless referenced otherwise) Numbers of speakers should not be summed up per country, as they most likely overlap considerably; table includes varieties with disputed statuses as separate language. Argentina Australia Belize Bolivia Brazil Canada Chile Israel Kazakhstan Mexico Namibia New Zealand Paraguay Russia South Africa Uruguay United States Sum Standard German 400,000 79,000 N/A 160,000 1,500,000 430,000 35,000 200,000 178,000 N/A 22,500 36,000 166,000 394,138[32] 12,000 28,000 1,104,354[33] 4,744,922 Hunsrik/Hunsrückisch N/A N/A N/A N/A 3,000,000 N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 3,000,000 Low German/Plautdietsch 4,000 N/A 6,900 60,000 8,000 80,000 N/A N/A 50,000 40,000 N/A N/A 40,000 N/A N/A 2,000 12,000 302,900 Pennsylvania Dutch N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 15,000 N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 118,000 133,000 Hutterite N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 23,200 N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 10,800 40,000 Europe and Asia[edit] Legal statuses of German in Europe:   "German Sprachraum": German is official language (de jure or de facto) and first language of the majority of the population   German is a co-official language, but not the first language of the majority of the population   German (or a German dialect) is a legally recognized minority language (Squares: Geographic distribution too dispersed/small for map scale)   German (or a variety of German) is spoken by a sizeable minority, but has no legal recognition German Sprachraum[edit] Main article: List of territorial entities where German is an official language The area in central Europe where the majority of the population speaks German as a first language and has German as a (co-)official language is called the "German Sprachraum". It comprises an estimated 88 million native speakers and 10 million who speak German as a second language (e.g. immigrants).[2][16] Excluding regional minority languages, German is the only official, nationwide language of Germany (de facto, not specified in the constitution), Austria (de jure), 17 cantons of Switzerland (de jure), and Liechtenstein (de jure). It is a co-official language of the Italian Autonomous Province of South Tyrol (also majority language), Belgium (as majority language only in the German-speaking Community), four cantons of Switzerland, and Luxembourg. Outside the Sprachraum[edit] Although expulsions and (forced) assimilation after the two World Wars greatly diminished them, minority communities of mostly bilingual German native speakers exist in areas both adjacent to and detached from the Sprachraum.[2] Within Europe and Asia, German is a recognized minority language in the following countries: Bosnia and Herzegovina[34] (see also: Donauschwaben) Czech Republic[34] (see also: Germans in the Czech Republic) Denmark[34] (see also: North Schleswig Germans) Hungary[34] (see also: Germans of Hungary) Italy[35] (outside of South Tyrol; see also: Cimbrian, Mòcheno/Fersentalerisch, Walser German) Kazakhstan[36] (see also: Germans of Kazakhstan) Poland[34] (see also German minority in Poland; German is auxiliary language in 31 communes;[37]) Romania[34] (see also: Germans of Romania) Russia[38] (see also: Germans in Russia) Slovakia[34] (see also: Carpathian Germans) Ukraine[34] (see also: Germans in Ukraine) In France, the High German varieties of Alsatian and Moselle Franconian are identified as "regional languages", but the European Charter for Regional and Minority Languages of 1998 has not yet been ratified by the government.[39] In the Netherlands, the Limburgish, Frisian, and Low German languages are protected regional languages according to the European Charter for Regional and Minority Languages;[34] however, they are widely considered separate languages and neither German nor Dutch dialects. Africa[edit] Namibia[edit] Examples of German language in Namibian everyday life Main article: German language in Namibia Namibia used to be a colony of the German Empire from 1884 to 1919. Mostly descending from German settlers who immigrated during this time, 25–30,000 people still speak German as a native tongue today.[40] German, along with English and Afrikaans was a co-official language of Namibia from 1984 until its independence from South Africa in 1990. At this point, the Namibian government perceived Afrikaans and German as symbols of apartheid and colonialism, and decided English would be the sole official language, claiming that it was a "neutral" language as there were virtually no English native speakers in Namibia at that time.[40] German, Afrikaans and several indigenous languages became "national languages" by law, identifying them as elements of the cultural heritage of the nation and ensuring that the state acknowledged and supported their presence in the country.[2] Today, German is used in a wide variety of spheres, especially business and tourism, as well as the churches (most notably the German-speaking Evangelical Lutheran Church in Namibia (GELK)), schools (e.g. the Deutsche Höhere Privatschule Windhoek), literature (German-Namibian authors include Giselher W. Hoffmann), radio (the Namibian Broadcasting Corporation produces radio programs in German), and music (e.g. artist EES). The Allgemeine Zeitung is one of the three biggest newspapers in Namibia and the only German-language daily in Africa.[40] South Africa[edit] Mostly originating from different waves of immigration during the 19th and 20th centuries, an estimated 12,000 people speak German or a German variety as a first language in South Africa.[41] One of the largest communities consists of the speakers of "Nataler Deutsch", a variety of Low German, concentrated in and around Wartburg. The South African constitution identifies German as a "commonly used" language and the Pan South African Language Board is obligated to promote and ensure respect for it.[42] North America[edit] Main articles: German in the United States, Pennsylvania German language, Plautdietsch and Hutterite German In the United States, the states of North Dakota and South Dakota are the only states where German is the most common language spoken at home after English.[43] German geographical names can be found throughout the Midwest region of the country, such as New Ulm and many other towns in Minnesota; Bismarck (North Dakota's state capital), Munich, Karlsruhe, and Strasburg (named after a town near Odessa in Ukraine)[44] in North Dakota; New Braunfels, Fredericksburg, Weimar, and Muenster in Texas; Corn (formerly Korn), Kiefer and Berlin in Oklahoma; and Kiel, Berlin, and Germantown in Wisconsin. Between 1843 and 1910, more than 5 million Germans emigrated overseas,[45] mostly to the United States.[46] German remained an important language in churches, schools, newspapers, and even the administration of the United States Brewers' Association[47] through the early 20th century, but was severely repressed during World War I. Over the course of the 20th century, many of the descendants of 18th century and 19th century immigrants ceased speaking German at home, but small populations of speakers are still found in Pennsylvania (Amish, Hutterites, Dunkards and some Mennonites historically spoke Hutterite German and a West Central German variety of German known as Pennsylvania German or Pennsylvania Dutch), Kansas (Mennonites and Volga Germans), North Dakota (Hutterite Germans, Mennonites, Russian Germans, Volga Germans, and Baltic Germans), South Dakota, Montana, Texas (Texas German), Wisconsin, Indiana, Oregon, Oklahoma, and Ohio (72,570).[48] A significant group of German Pietists in Iowa formed the Amana Colonies and continue to practice speaking their heritage language. Early twentieth century immigration was often to St. Louis, Chicago, New York, Milwaukee, Pittsburgh and Cincinnati. German-language newspapers in the U.S. in 1922 The dialects of German which are or were primarily spoken in colonies or communities founded by German-speaking people resemble the dialects of the regions the founders came from. For example, Hutterite German resembles dialects of Carinthia. Texas German is a dialect spoken in the areas of Texas settled by the Adelsverein, such as New Braunfels and Fredericksburg. In the Amana Colonies in the state of Iowa, Amana German is spoken. Plautdietsch is a large minority language spoken in Northern Mexico by the Mennonite communities, and is spoken by more than 200,000 people in Mexico. Pennsylvania German is a West Central German dialect spoken by most of the Amish population of Pennsylvania, Ohio, and Indiana and resembles Palatinate German dialects. Hutterite German is an Upper German dialect of the Austro-Bavarian variety of the German language, which is spoken by Hutterite communities in Canada and the United States. Hutterite is spoken in the U.S. states of Washington, Montana, North Dakota, South Dakota, and Minnesota; and in the Canadian provinces of Alberta, Saskatchewan and Manitoba. Its speakers belong to some Schmiedleit, Lehrerleit, and Dariusleit Hutterite groups, but there are also speakers among the older generations of Prairieleit (the descendants of those Hutterites who chose not to settle in colonies). Hutterite children who grow up in the colonies learn to speak Hutterite German before learning English, the standard language of the surrounding areas, in school. Many of these children, though, continue with German Grammar School, in addition to public school, throughout a student's elementary education.[citation needed] In Canada, there are 622,650 speakers of German according to the most recent census in 2006,[49] with people of German ancestry (German Canadians) are found throughout the country. German-speaking communities are particularly found in British Columbia (118,035) and Ontario (230,330).[49] There is a large and vibrant community in the city of Kitchener, Ontario, which was at one point named Berlin. German immigrants were instrumental in the country's three largest urban areas: Montreal, Toronto, and Vancouver; post-Second World War immigrants managed to preserve a fluency in the German language in their respective neighborhoods and sections. In the first half of the 20th century, over a million German-Canadians made the language Canada's third most spoken after French and English. In Mexico there are also large populations of German ancestry, mainly in the cities of: Mexico City, Puebla, Mazatlán, Tapachula, Ecatepec de Morelos, and larger populations scattered in the states of Chihuahua, Durango, and Zacatecas. South America[edit] Municipalities where Pomeranian dialects are co-official in Espírito Santo, Brazil. Main articles: Brazilian German and Colonia Tovar dialect In Brazil, the largest concentrations of German speakers are in the states of Rio Grande do Sul (where Riograndenser Hunsrückisch developed), Santa Catarina, Paraná, São Paulo and Espírito Santo.[50] There are also important concentrations of German-speaking descendants in Argentina, Chile, Paraguay, Venezuela, Peru and Bolivia.[41] In the 20th century, over 100,000 German political refugees and invited entrepreneurs settled in Latin America, in countries such as Costa Rica, Panama, Venezuela, and the Dominican Republic, to establish German-speaking enclaves, and reportedly there is a small German immigration to Puerto Rico. In most locations where German immigrants settled, the vast majority of their descendents no longer speak German, as they have been largely assimilated into the host language and culture of the specific location of settlement; generally Spanish or Portuguese. Co-official statuses of German or German varieties in Brazil[edit] Espírito Santo (statewide cultural language)[50][51] Domingos Martins Laranja da Terra Pancas Santa Maria de Jetibá Vila Pavão Rio Grande do Sul[50] Santa Maria do Herval Canguçu Santa Catarina[50] Antônio Carlos Pomerode Oceania[edit] German language center in Chandigarh. In Australia, the state of South Australia experienced a pronounced wave of immigration in the 1840s from Prussia (particularly the Silesia region). With the prolonged isolation from other German speakers and contact with Australian English, a unique dialect known as Barossa German has developed and is spoken predominantly in the Barossa Valley near Adelaide. Usage of German sharply declined with the advent of World War I, due to the prevailing anti-German sentiment in the population and related government action. It continued to be used as a first language into the twentieth century but now its use is limited to a few older speakers.[citation needed] German migration to New Zealand in the 19th century was less pronounced than migration from Britain, Ireland, and perhaps even Scandinavia. Despite this there were significant pockets of German-speaking communities which lasted until the first decades of the 20th century. German-speakers settled principally in Puhoi, Nelson, and Gore. At the last census (2006), 37,500 people in New Zealand spoke German, making it the third most spoken European language after English and French and overall the ninth most spoken language. There is also an important German creole being studied and recovered, named Unserdeutsch, spoken in the former German colony of German New Guinea, across Micronesia and in northern Australia (i.e. coastal parts of Queensland and Western Australia), by a few elderly people. The risk of its extinction is serious and efforts to revive interest in the language are being implemented by scholars. German as a foreign language[edit] Knowledge of German as a foreign language in the EU member states (+Turkey), in per cent of the adult population (+15), 2005. Like French, German has become a classic second foreign language in the western world, as English (Spanish in the US) is well established as first foreign language.[3][52] German ranks second (after English) among the best known foreign languages in the EU (on a par with French)[3] as well as in Russia.[53] In terms of student numbers across all levels of education, German ranks third in the EU (after English and French)[28] as well as in the United States (after Spanish and French).[9][54] In 2015, approximately 15.4 million people were in the process of learning German across all levels of education worldwide.[52] As this number remained relatively stable since 2005 (± 1 million), roughly 75–100 million people able to communicate in German as foreign language can be inferred assuming an average course duration of three years and other estimated parameters.[2] According to a 2012 survey, 47 million people, i.e., up to two thirds of this global number, within the EU claimed to have sufficient German skills to have a conversation. Within the EU, not counting countries where it is an official language, German as a foreign language is most popular in Eastern and Northern Europe, namely the Czech Republic, Croatia, Denmark, the Netherlands, Slovakia, Slovenia, Sweden and Poland.[3][28] German was once and, to some extent, is still, a lingua franca in those parts of Europe.[55] Standard German[edit] Main article: Standard German Standard German originated not as a traditional dialect of a specific region but as a written language. However, there are places where the traditional regional dialects have been replaced by new vernaculars based on standard German; that is the case in large stretches of Northern Germany but also in major cities in other parts of the country. It is important to note, however, that the colloquial standard German differs greatly from the formal written language, especially in grammar and syntax, in which it has been influenced by dialectal speech. Standard German differs regionally between German-speaking countries in vocabulary and some instances of pronunciation and even grammar and orthography. This variation must not be confused with the variation of local dialects. Even though the regional varieties of standard German are only somewhat influenced by the local dialects, they are very distinct. German is thus considered a pluricentric language. In most regions, the speakers use a continuum from more dialectal varieties to more standard varieties according to circumstances. Varieties of Standard German[edit] The national and regional standard varieties of German.[56] In German linguistics, German dialects are distinguished from varieties of standard German. The varieties of standard German refer to the different local varieties of the pluricentric standard German. They differ only slightly in lexicon and phonology. In certain regions, they have replaced the traditional German dialects, especially in Northern Germany. German Standard German Austrian Standard German Swiss Standard German In the German-speaking parts of Switzerland, mixtures of dialect and standard are very seldom used, and the use of Standard German is largely restricted to the written language, though about 10% of the Swiss residents speak High German (aka Standard German) at home, but mainly due to German immigrants.[57] This situation has been called a medial diglossia. Swiss Standard German is used in the Swiss education system, whereas Austrian Standard German is officially used in the Austrian education system. A mixture of dialect and standard does not normally occur in Northern Germany either. The traditional varieties there are Low German, whereas Standard German is a High German "variety". Because their linguistic distance to it is greater, they do not mesh with Standard German the way that High German dialects (such as Bavarian, Swabian, Hessian) can. Dialects[edit] Main article: German dialects Distribution of the native speakers of major continental West-Germanic dialectal varieties. German is a member of the West Germanic language of the Germanic family of languages, which in turn is part of the Indo-European language family. The German dialects are the traditional local varieties, many of them are hardly understandable to someone who knows only standard German, and they have great differences in lexicon, phonology and syntax. If a narrow definition of language based on mutual intelligibility is used, many German dialects are considered to be separate languages (for instance in the Ethnologue). However, such a point of view is unusual in German linguistics.[2] The German dialect continuum is traditionally divided most broadly into High German and Low German, also called Low Saxon. However, historically, High German dialects and Low Saxon/Low German dialects do not belong to the same language. Nevertheless, in today's Germany, Low Saxon/Low German is often perceived as a dialectal variation of Standard German on a functional level even by many native speakers. The same phenomenon is found in the eastern Netherlands, as the traditional dialects are not always identified with their Low Saxon/Low German origins, but with Dutch.[58] The variation among the German dialects is considerable, with often only neighbouring dialects being mutually intelligible. Some dialects are not intelligible to people who know only Standard German. However, all German dialects belong to the dialect continuum of High German and Low Saxon. Low German[edit] Main article: Low German Middle Low German was the lingua franca of the Hanseatic League. It was the predominant language in Northern Germany until the 16th century. In 1534, the Luther Bible was published. The translation is considered to be an important step towards the evolution of the Early New High German. It aimed to be understandable to a broad audience and was based mainly on Central and Upper German varieties. The Early New High German language gained more prestige than Low German and became the language of science and literature. Around the same time, the Hanseatic League, based around northern ports, lost its importance as new trade routes to Asia and the Americas were established, and the most powerful German states of that period were located in Middle and Southern Germany. The 18th and 19th centuries were marked by mass education in Standard German in schools. Gradually, Low German came to be politically viewed as a mere dialect spoken by the uneducated. Today, Low Saxon can be divided in two groups: Low Saxon varieties with a reasonable Standard German influx[clarification needed] and varieties of Standard German with a Low Saxon influence known as Missingsch. Sometimes, Low Saxon and Low Franconian varieties are grouped together because both are unaffected by the High German consonant shift. However, the proportion of the population who can understand and speak it has decreased continuously since World War II. High German[edit] Main article: High German languages High German is divided into Central German, High Franconian (a transitional dialect), and Upper German. Central German dialects include Ripuarian, Moselle Franconian, Rhine Franconian, Central Hessian, East Hessian, North Hessian, Thuringian, Silesian German, Lorraine Franconian, Mittelalemannisch, North Upper Saxon, High Prussian, Lausitzisch-Neumärkisch and Upper Saxon. It is spoken in the southeastern Netherlands, eastern Belgium, Luxembourg, parts of France and parts of Germany roughly between the river Main and the southern edge of the Lowlands. Modern Standard German is mostly based on Central German, but the common (linguistically incorrect) German term for modern Standard German is Hochdeutsch, High German. The Moselle Franconian varieties spoken in Luxembourg have been officially standardised and institutionalised and are usually considered a separate language known as Luxembourgish. The two High Franconian dialects are East Franconian and South Franconian. Upper German dialects include Northern Austro-Bavarian, Central Austro-Bavarian, Southern Austro-Bavarian, Swabian, East Franconian, High Alemannic German, Highest Alemannic German, Alsatian and Low Alemannic German. They are spoken in parts of the Alsace, southern Germany, Liechtenstein, Austria, and the German-speaking parts of Switzerland and Italy. Wymysorys is a High German dialect of Poland native to Wilamowice, and Sathmarisch and Siebenbürgisch are High German dialects of Romania. The High German varieties spoken by Ashkenazi Jews (mostly in the former Russian Empire) have several unique features, and are usually considered as a separate language, Yiddish. It is the only Germanic language that does not use the Latin script as the basis of its standard alphabet. Grammar[edit] Main article: German grammar German is a fusional language with a moderate degree of inflection, with three grammatical genders; as such, there can be a large number of words derived from the same root. Noun inflection[edit] Declension of the German definite articles (all equivalent to English "the"). German nouns inflect by case, gender and number: four cases: nominative, accusative, genitive and dative. three genders: masculine, feminine and neuter. Word endings sometimes reveal grammatical gender: for instance, nouns ending in -ung (-ing), -schaft (-ship), -keit or heit (-hood, -ness) are feminine, and nouns ending in -chen or -lein (diminutive forms) are neuter and nouns ending in -ismus (-ism) are masculine. Others are more variable, sometimes depending on the region in which the language is spoken; and some endings are not restricted to one gender, e.g. -er (-er), e.g. Feier (feminine), celebration, party, Arbeiter (masculine), labourer, and Gewitter (neuter), thunderstorm. two numbers: singular and plural. This degree of inflection is considerably less than in Old High German and other old Indo-European languages such as Latin, Ancient Greek, and Sanskrit, and it is also somewhat less than, for instance, Old English, modern Icelandic and Russian. The three genders have collapsed in the plural. With four cases and three genders plus plural, there are 16 permutations of case and gender/number, but there are only six forms of the definite article, which together cover all 16 permutations. In nouns, inflection for case is required in the singular for strong masculine and neuter nouns, in the genitive and sometimes in the dative. Both of these cases are losing ground to substitutes in informal speech. The dative noun ending is considered somewhat old-fashioned in many contexts and is often dropped, but it is still used in proverbs and the like, in formal speech and in written language. Weak masculine nouns share a common case ending for genitive, dative and accusative in the singular. Feminine nouns are not declined in the singular. The plural has an inflection for the dative. In total, seven inflectional endings (not counting plural markers) exist in German: -s, -es, -n, -ns, -en, -ens, -e. In German orthography, nouns and most words with the syntactical function of nouns are capitalised to make it easier for readers to determine the function of a word within a sentence (Am Freitag ging ich einkaufen. – "On Friday I went shopping."; Eines Tages kreuzte er endlich auf. – "One day he finally showed up.") This convention is almost unique to German today (shared perhaps only by the closely related Luxembourgish language and several insular dialects of the North Frisian language), but it was historically common in other languages such as Danish (which abolished the capitalization of nouns in 1948) and English. Like the other Germanic languages, German forms noun compounds in which the first noun modifies the category given by the second,: Hundehütte ("dog hut"; specifically: "dog kennel"). Unlike English, whose newer compounds or combinations of longer nouns are often written in "open" with separating spaces, German (like some other Germanic languages) nearly always uses the "closed" form without spaces, for example: Baumhaus ("tree house"). Like English, German allows arbitrarily long compounds in theory (see also English compounds). The longest German word verified to be actually in (albeit very limited) use is Rindfleischetikettierungsüberwachungsaufgabenübertragungsgesetz, which, literally translated, is "beef labelling supervision duty assignment law" [from Rind (cattle), Fleisch (meat), Etikettierung(s) (labelling), Überwachung(s) (supervision), Aufgaben (duties), Übertragung(s) (assignment), Gesetz (law)]. However, examples like this are perceived by native speakers as excessively bureaucratic, stylistically awkward or even satirical. Verb inflection[edit] Main article: German verbs The inflection of standard German verbs includes: two main conjugation classes: weak and strong (as in English). Additionally, there is a third class, known as mixed verbs, whose conjugation combines features of both the strong and weak patterns. three persons: first, second and third. two numbers: singular and plural. three moods: indicative, imperative and subjunctive (in addition to infinitive) two voices: active and passive. The passive voice uses auxiliary verbs and is divisible into static and dynamic. Static forms show a constant state and use the verb ’’to be’’ (sein). Dynamic forms show an action and use the verb “to become’’ (werden). two tenses without auxiliary verbs (present and preterite) and four tenses constructed with auxiliary verbs (perfect, pluperfect, future and future perfect). the distinction between grammatical aspects is rendered by combined use of subjunctive and/or preterite marking so the plain indicative voice uses neither of those two markers; the subjunctive by itself conveys secondhand information[clarification needed]; subjunctive plus preterite marks the conditional state; and the preterite alone shows either plain indicative (in the past), or functions as a (literal) alternative for either second-hand-information or the conditional state of the verb, when necessary for clarity. the distinction between perfect and progressive aspect is and has, at every stage of development, been a productive category of the older language and in nearly all documented dialects, but, strangely enough, it is now rigorously excluded from written usage in its present normalised form. disambiguation of completed vs. uncompleted forms is widely observed and regularly generated by common prefixes (blicken [to look], erblicken [to see – unrelated form: sehen]). Verb prefixes[edit] The meaning of basic verbs can be expanded and sometimes radically changed through the use of a number of prefixes. Some prefixes have a specific meaning; the prefix zer- refers to destruction, as in zerreißen (to tear apart), zerbrechen (to break apart), zerschneiden (to cut apart). Other prefixes have only the vaguest meaning in themselves; ver- is found in a number of verbs with a large variety of meanings, as in versuchen (to try) from suchen (to seek), vernehmen (to interrogate) from nehmen (to take), verteilen (to distribute) from teilen (to share), verstehen (to understand) from stehen (to stand). Other examples include the following: haften (to stick), verhaften (to detain); kaufen (to buy), verkaufen (to sell); hören (to hear), aufhören (to cease); fahren (to drive), erfahren (to experience). Many German verbs have a separable prefix, often with an adverbial function. In finite verb forms, it is split off and moved to the end of the clause and is hence considered by some to be a "resultative particle". For example, mitgehen, meaning "to go along", would be split, giving Gehen Sie mit? (Literal: "Go you with?"; Idiomatic: "Are you going along?"). Indeed, several parenthetical clauses may occur between the prefix of a finite verb and its complement: Er kam am Freitagabend nach einem harten Arbeitstag und dem üblichen Ärger, der ihn schon seit Jahren immer wieder an seinem Arbeitsplatz plagt, mit fraglicher Freude auf ein Mahl, das seine Frau ihm, wie er hoffte, bereits aufgetischt hatte, endlich zu Hause an. A selectively literal translation of this example to illustrate the point might look like this: He "came" on Friday evening, after a hard day at work and the usual annoyances that had time and again been troubling him for years now at his workplace, with questionable joy, to a meal which, as he hoped, his wife had already put on the table, finally at home "on". Word order[edit] German word order is generally with the V2 word order restriction and also with the SOV word order restriction for main clauses. For polar questions, exclamations and wishes, the finite verb always has the first position. In subordinate clauses, the verb occurs at the very end. German requires for a verbal element (main verb or auxiliary verb) to appear second in the sentence. The verb is preceded by the topic of the sentence. The element in focus appears at the end of the sentence. For a sentence without an auxiliary, these are some possibilities: Der alte Mann gab mir gestern das Buch. (The old man gave me yesterday the book; normal order) Das Buch gab mir gestern der alte Mann. (The book gave [to] me yesterday the old man) Das Buch gab der alte Mann mir gestern. (The book gave the old man [to] me yesterday) Das Buch gab mir der alte Mann gestern. (The book gave [to] me the old man yesterday) Gestern gab mir der alte Mann das Buch. (Yesterday gave [to] me the old man the book, normal order) Mir gab der alte Mann das Buch gestern. ([To] me gave the old man the book yesterday (entailing: as for you, it was another date)) The position of a noun in a German sentence has no bearing on its being a subject, an object or another argument. In a declarative sentence in English, if the subject does not occur before the predicate, the sentence could well be misunderstood. However, German's flexibile word order allows one to emphasise specific words: Normal word order: Der Direktor betrat gestern um 10 Uhr mit einem Schirm in der Hand sein Büro. The manager entered yesterday at 10 o'clock with an umbrella in the hand his office. Object in front: Sein Büro betrat der Direktor gestern um 10 Uhr mit einem Schirm in der Hand. His office entered the manager yesterday at 10 o'clock with an umbrella in the hand. The object Sein Büro (his office) is thus highlighted; it could be the topic of the next sentence. Adverb of time in front: Gestern betrat der Direktor um 10 Uhr mit einem Schirm in der Hand sein Büro. (aber heute ohne Schirm) Yesterday entered the manager at 10 o'clock with an umbrella in the hand his office. (but today without umbrella) Both time expressions in front: Gestern um 10 Uhr betrat der Direktor mit einem Schirm in der Hand sein Büro. Yesterday at 10 o'clock entered the manager with an umbrella in the hand his office. The full-time specification Gestern um 10 Uhr is highlighted. Another possibility: Gestern um 10 Uhr betrat der Direktor sein Büro mit einem Schirm in der Hand. Yesterday at 10 o'clock the manager entered his office with an umbrella in his hand. Both the time specification and the fact he carried an umbrella are accentuated. Swapped adverbs: Der Direktor betrat mit einem Schirm in der Hand gestern um 10 Uhr sein Büro. The manager entered with an umbrella in the hand yesterday at 10 o'clock his office. The phrase mit einem Schirm in der Hand is highlighted. Swapped object: Der Direktor betrat gestern um 10 Uhr sein Büro mit einem Schirm in der Hand. The warden entered yesterday at 10 o'clock his office with an umbrella in his hand. The time specification and the object sein Büro (his office) are lightly accentuated. The flexible word order also allows one to use language "tools" (such as poetic meter and figures of speech) more freely. Auxiliary verbs[edit] When an auxiliary verb is present, it appears in second position, and the main verb appears at the end. This occurs notably in the creation of the perfect tense. Many word orders are still possible: Der alte Mann hat mir heute das Buch gegeben. (The old man has me today the book given.) Das Buch hat der alte Mann mir heute gegeben. (The book has the old man me today given.) Heute hat der alte Mann mir das Buch gegeben. (Today has the old man me the book given.) Modal verbs[edit] Sentences using modal verbs place the infinitive at the end. For example, the English sentence "Should he go home?" would be rearranged in German to say "Should he (to) home go?" (Soll er nach Hause gehen?). Thus, in sentences with several subordinate or relative clauses, the infinitives are clustered at the end. Compare the similar clustering of prepositions in the following (highly contrived) English sentence: "What did you bring that book that I do not like to be read to out of up for?" Multiple infinitives[edit] German subordinate clauses have all verbs clustered at the end. Given that auxiliaries encode future, passive, modality, and the perfect, very long chains of verbs at the end of the sentence can occur. In these constructions, the past participle in ge- is often replaced by the infinitive. Man nimmt an, dass der Deserteur wohl erschossenV wordenpsv seinperf sollmod One suspects that the deserter probably shot become be should. ("It is suspected that the deserter probably should have been shot") Er wusste nicht, dass der Agent einen Nachschlüssel hatte machen lassen He knew not that the agent a picklock had make let Er wusste nicht, dass der Agent einen Nachschlüssel machen lassen hatte He knew not that the agent a picklock make let had ("He did not know that the agent had had a picklock made") The order at the end of such strings is subject to variation, but the latter version is unusual. Vocabulary[edit] Duden dictionary. ÖWB, Austrian Dictionary from 1985. Most German vocabulary is derived from the Germanic branch of the European language family. However, there is a significant amount of loanwords from other languages, in particular from Latin, Greek, Italian, French[59] and most recently English.[60] Latin words were already imported into the predecessor of the German language during the Roman Empire and underwent all the characteristic phonetic changes in German. Their origin is thus no longer recognizable for most speakers (e.g. Pforte, Tafel, Mauer, Käse, Köln from Latin porta, tabula, murus, caseus, Colonia). Borrowing from Latin continued after the fall of the Roman Empire during Christianization, mediated by the church and monasteries. Another important influx of Latin words can be observed during Renaissance humanism. In a scholarly context, the borrowings from Latin have continued until today, in the last few decades often indirectly through borrowings from English. During the 15th to 17th centuries, the influence of Italian was great, leading to many Italian loanwords in the fields of architecture, finance, and music. The influence of the French language in the 17th to 19th centuries resulted in an even greater import of French words. The English influence was already present in the 19th century, but it did not become dominant until the second half of the 20th century. At the same time, the effectiveness of the German language in forming equivalents for foreign words from its inherited Germanic stem repertory is great.[citation needed] Thus, Notker Labeo was able to translate Aristotelian treatises in pure (Old High) German in the decades after the year 1000. The tradition of loan translation was revitalized in the 18th century, with linguists like Joachim Heinrich Campe, who introduced hundreds of words that are still used in modern German. Even today, there are movements that try to promote the Ersatz (substitution) of foreign words deemed unnecessary with German alternatives.[61] It is claimed that this would also help in spreading modern or scientific notions among the less educated and as well democratise public life. As in English, there are many pairs of synonyms due to the enrichment of the Germanic vocabulary with loanwords from Latin and Latinized Greek. These words often have different connotations from their Germanic counterparts and are usually perceived as more scholarly. Historie – "historical", (Geschichte, geschichtlich) Humanität – "humaneness", (Menschlichkeit) Millennium – "millennium", (Jahrtausend) Perzeption – "perception", (Wahrnehmung) Vokabular – "vocabulary", (Wortschatz) The size of the vocabulary of German is difficult to estimate. The Deutsches Wörterbuch (The German Dictionary) initiated by Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm already contained over 330,000 headwords in its first edition. The modern German scientific vocabulary is estimated at nine million words and word groups (based on the analysis of 35 million sentences of a corpus in Leipzig, which as of July 2003 included 500 million words in total).[62] The Duden is the de facto official dictionary of the German language, first published by Konrad Duden in 1880. The Duden is updated regularly, with new editions appearing every four or five years. As of August 2013[update] it is in its 26th edition and in 12 volumes, each covering different aspects such as loanwords, etymology, pronunciation, synonyms, and so forth. The first of these volumes, Die deutsche Rechtschreibung (English: German Orthography), has long been the prescriptive source for the spelling of German. The Duden has become the bible of the German language, being the definitive set of rules regarding grammar, spelling and usage of German.[63] The Österreichisches Wörterbuch ("Austrian Dictionary"), abbreviated ÖWB, is the official dictionary of the German language in the Republic of Austria. It is edited by a group of linguists under the authority of the Austrian Federal Ministry of Education, Arts and Culture (German: Bundesministerium für Unterricht, Kunst und Kultur). It is the Austrian counterpart to the German Duden and contains a number of terms unique to Austrian German or more frequently used or differently pronounced there.[64] A considerable amount of this "Austrian" vocabulary is also common in Southern Germany, especially Bavaria, and some of it is used in Switzerland as well. The most recent edition is the 42nd from 2012. Since the 39th edition from 2001 the orthography of the ÖWB was adjusted to the German spelling reform of 1996. The dictionary is also officially used in the Italian province of South Tyrol. Orthography[edit] Main articles: German orthography and German braille German alphabet, one of Austria's elementary school handwriting programs German alphabet, elementary school handwriting program in some West German states German is written in the Latin alphabet. In addition to the 26 standard letters, German has three vowels with Umlaut, namely ä, ö and ü, as well as the Eszett or scharfes s (sharp s), ß. In Switzerland "ss" is used instead of "ß". Additionally, when written in capitals, "ß" is replaced with "ss" in Germany, whereas in Austria it is traditionally replaced with "sz" (the same digraph used in Hungarian for the "s" sound); there are some exceptions to these rules (see below). Written texts in German are easily recognisable as such by distinguishing features such as umlauts and certain orthographical features – German is the only major language that capitalizes all nouns, a relic of a widespread practice in Northern Europe in the early modern era (including English for a while, in the 1700s) – and the frequent occurrence of long compounds. The longest German word that has been published is Donaudampfschiffahrtselektrizitätenhauptbetriebswerkbauunterbeamtengesellschaft made of 79 characters. Because legibility and convenience set certain boundaries, compounds consisting of more than three or four nouns are almost exclusively found in humorous contexts. (In contrast, although English can also string nouns together, it usually separates the nouns with spaces. For example, "toilet bowl cleaner".) Present[edit] Before the German orthography reform of 1996, ß replaced ss after long vowels and diphthongs and before consonants, word-, or partial-word-endings. In reformed spelling, ß replaces ss only after long vowels and diphthongs. Because there is no capital ß, it is always written as "SS" when capitalization is required. For example, Maßband (tape measure) is capitalized MASSBAND. An exception is the use of ß in legal documents and forms when capitalizing names. To avoid confusion with similar names, a "ß" is used instead of "SS". (So: "KREßLEIN" instead of "KRESSLEIN".) A capital ß has been proposed and included in Unicode ("ẞ"; Unicode character U+1E9E), but it is not yet recognized as standard German. In Switzerland, ß is not used at all. Umlaut vowels (ä, ö, ü) are commonly transcribed with ae, oe, and ue if the umlauts are not available on the keyboard or other medium used. In the same manner ß can be transcribed as ss. Some operating systems use key sequences to extend the set of possible characters to include, amongst other things, umlauts; in Microsoft Windows this is done using Alt codes. German readers understand these transcriptions (although they appear unusual), but they are avoided if the regular umlauts are available because they are a makeshift, not proper spelling. (In Westphalia and Schleswig-Holstein, city and family names exist where the extra e has a vowel lengthening effect, e.g. Raesfeld [ˈraːsfɛlt], Coesfeld [ˈkoːsfɛlt] and Itzehoe [ɪtsəˈhoː], but this use of the letter e after a/o/u does not occur in the present-day spelling of words other than proper nouns.) German alphabet Sorry, your browser either has JavaScript disabled or does not have any supported player. You can download the clip or download a player to play the clip in your browser. (Listen to a German speaker recite the alphabet in German) Problems playing this file? See media help. There is no general agreement on where letters with umlauts occur in the sorting sequence. Telephone directories treat them by replacing them with the base vowel followed by an e. Some dictionaries sort each umlauted vowel as a separate letter after the base vowel, but more commonly words with umlauts are ordered immediately after the same word without umlauts. As an example in a telephone book Ärzte occurs after Adressenverlage but before Anlagenbauer (because Ä is replaced by Ae). In a dictionary Ärzte comes after Arzt, but in some dictionaries Ärzte and all other words starting with Ä may occur after all words starting with A. In some older dictionaries or indexes, initial Sch and St are treated as separate letters and are listed as separate entries after S, but they are usually treated as S+C+H and S+T. Written German also typically uses an alternative opening inverted comma (quotation mark) as in „Guten Morgen!“. Past[edit] A Russian dictionary from 1931, showing the "German alphabet" – the 3rd and 4th columns of each half are Fraktur and Kurrent respectively, with the footnote explaining ligatures used in Fraktur. Further information: 2nd Orthographic Conference (German), Antiqua–Fraktur dispute and German orthography reform of 1944 Until the early 20th century, German was mostly printed in blackletter typefaces (mostly in Fraktur, but also in Schwabacher) and written in corresponding handwriting (for example Kurrent and Sütterlin). These variants of the Latin alphabet are very different from the serif or sans-serif Antiqua typefaces used today, and the handwritten forms in particular are difficult for the untrained to read. The printed forms, however, were claimed by some to be more readable when used for Germanic languages.[65] (Often, foreign names in a text were printed in an Antiqua typeface even though the rest of the text was in Fraktur.) The Nazis initially promoted Fraktur and Schwabacher because they were considered Aryan, but they abolished them in 1941, claiming that these letters were Jewish.[66] It is also believed that the Nazi régime had banned this script as they realized that Fraktur would inhibit communication in the territories occupied during World War II.[67] The Fraktur script however remains present in everyday life in pub signs, beer brands and other forms of advertisement, where it is used to convey a certain rusticality and antiquity. A proper use of the long s, (langes s), ſ, is essential for writing German text in Fraktur typefaces. Many Antiqua typefaces include the long s also. A specific set of rules applies for the use of long s in German text, but nowadays it is rarely used in Antiqua typesetting. Any lower case "s" at the beginning of a syllable would be a long s, as opposed to a terminal s or short s (the more common variation of the letter s), which marks the end of a syllable; for example, in differentiating between the words Wachſtube (guard-house) and Wachstube (tube of polish/wax). One can easily decide which "s" to use by appropriate hyphenation, (Wach-ſtube vs. Wachs-tube). The long s only appears in lower case. Reform of 1996[edit] Main article: German orthography reform of 1996 The orthography reform of 1996 led to public controversy and considerable dispute. The states (Bundesländer) of North Rhine-Westphalia and Bavaria would not accept it. The dispute landed at one point in the highest court, which made a short issue of it, claiming that the states had to decide for themselves and that only in schools could the reform be made the official rule – everybody else could continue writing as they had learned it. After 10 years, without any intervention by the federal parliament, a major revision was installed in 2006, just in time for the coming school year. In 2007, some traditional spellings were finally invalidated, whereas in 2008, on the other hand, many of the old comma rules were again put in force. The most noticeable change was probably in the use of the letter ß, called scharfes s (Sharp S) or ess-zett (pronounced ess-tsett). Traditionally, this letter was used in three situations: After a long vowel or vowel combination, Before a t, and At the end of a syllable Thus Füße, paßt, and daß. Currently only the first rule is in effect, thus Füße, passt, and dass. The word Fuß 'foot' has the letter ß because it contains a long vowel, even though that letter occurs at the end of a syllable. The logic of this change is that an 'ß' is a single letter whereas 'ss' obviously are two letters, so the same distinction applies as for instance between the words den and denn. Phonology[edit] Main article: German phonology Vowels[edit] Sorry, your browser either has JavaScript disabled or does not have any supported player. You can download the clip or download a player to play the clip in your browser. Spoken German in Goethe's Faust In German, vowels (excluding diphthongs; see below) are either short or long, as follows: A Ä E I O Ö U Ü short /a/ /ɛ/ /ɛ/, /ə/ /ɪ/ /ɔ/ /œ/ /ʊ/ /ʏ/ long /aː/ /ɛː/ /eː/ /iː/ /oː/ /øː/ /uː/ /yː/ Short /ɛ/ is realized as [ɛ] in stressed syllables (including secondary stress), but as [ə] in unstressed syllables. Note that stressed short /ɛ/ can be spelled either with e or with ä (for instance, hätte "would have" and Kette "chain" rhyme). In general, the short vowels are open and the long vowels are close. The one exception is the open /ɛː/ sound of long Ä; in some varieties of standard German, /ɛː/ and /eː/ have merged into [eː], removing this anomaly. In that case, pairs like Bären/Beeren 'bears/berries' or Ähre/Ehre 'spike (of wheat)/honour' become homophonous (see: Captain Bluebear). In many varieties of standard German, an unstressed /ɛr/ is not pronounced [ər], but vocalised to [ɐ]. Whether any particular vowel letter represents the long or short phoneme is not completely predictable, although the following regularities exist: If a vowel (other than i) is at the end of a syllable or followed by a single consonant, it is usually pronounced long (e.g. Hof [hoːf]). If a vowel is followed by h or if an i is followed by an e, it is long. If the vowel is followed by a double consonant (e.g. ff, ss or tt), ck, tz or a consonant cluster (e.g. st or nd), it is nearly always short (e.g. hoffen [ˈhɔfən]). Double consonants are used only for this function of marking preceding vowels as short; the consonant itself is never pronounced lengthened or doubled, in other words this is not a feeding order of gemination and then vowel shortening. Both of these rules have exceptions (e.g. hat [hat] "has" is short despite the first rule; Mond [moːnt], "moon" is long despite the second rule). For an i that is neither in the combination ie (making it long) nor followed by a double consonant or cluster (making it short), there is no general rule. In some cases, there are regional differences: In central Germany (Hessen), the o in the proper name "Hoffmann" is pronounced long, whereas most other Germans would pronounce it short; the same applies to the e in the geographical name "Mecklenburg" for people in that region. The word Städte "cities", is pronounced with a short vowel [ˈʃtɛtə] by some (Jan Hofer, ARD Television) and with a long vowel [ˈʃtɛːtə] by others (Marietta Slomka, ZDF Television). Finally, a vowel followed by ch can be short (Fach [fax] "compartment", Küche [ˈkʏçə] "kitchen") or long (Suche [ˈzuːxə] "search", Bücher [ˈbyːçɐ] "books") almost at random. Thus, Lache is homographous between [laːxə] Lache "puddle" and [laxə] Lache "manner of laughing" (colloquial) or lache! "laugh!" (imperative). German vowels can form the following digraphs (in writing) and diphthongs (in pronunciation); note that the pronunciation of some of them (ei, äu, eu) is very different from what one would expect when considering the component letters: spelling ai, ei, ay, ey au äu, eu pronunciation /aɪ̯/ /aʊ̯/ /ɔʏ̯/ Additionally, the digraph ie generally represents the phoneme /iː/, which is not a diphthong. In many varieties, an /r/ at the end of a syllable is vocalised. However, a sequence of a vowel followed by such a vocalised /r/ is not a phonemic diphthong: Bär [bɛːɐ̯] "bear", er [eːɐ̯] "he", wir [viːɐ̯] "we", Tor [toːɐ̯] "gate", kurz [kʊɐ̯ts] "short", Wörter [vœɐ̯tɐ] "words". In most varieties of standard German, syllables that begin with a vowel are preceded by a glottal stop [ʔ]. Consonants[edit] With approximately 25 phonemes, the German consonant system exhibits an average number of consonants in comparison with other languages. One of the more noteworthy ones is the unusual affricate /p͡f/. The consonant inventory of the standard language is shown below. Bilabial Labiodental Alveolar Postalveolar Palatal Velar Uvular Glottal Plosive p3  b4 t3  d4 k3  ɡ4 Affricate pf ts tʃ  (dʒ)5 Fricative f  v s  z ʃ  (ʒ)5 x1 h Nasal m n ŋ Approximant l j Rhotic r2 (ʁ~ʀ)2 1/x/ has two allophones, [x] and [ç], after back and front vowels, respectively. 2/r/ has three allophones in free variation: [r], [ʁ] and [ʀ]. In the syllable coda, the allophone [ɐ] is found in many varieties. 3 The voiceless stops /p/, /t/, /k/ are aspirated except when preceded by a sibilant, exactly as in English. 4 The voiced stops /b/, /d/, /ɡ/ are devoiced to /p/, /t/, /k/, respectively, in word-final position. 5/d͡ʒ/ and /ʒ/ occur only in words of foreign (usually English or French) origin. Where a stressed syllable has an initial vowel, it is preceded by [ʔ]. As its presence is predictable from context, [ʔ] is not considered a phoneme. Consonant spellings[edit] c standing by itself is not a German letter. In borrowed words, it is usually pronounced [t͡s] (before ä, äu, e, i, ö, ü, y) or [k] (before a, o, u, and consonants). The combination ck is, as in English, used to indicate that the preceding vowel is short. ch occurs often and is pronounced either [ç] (after ä, ai, äu, e, ei, eu, i, ö, ü and consonants; in the diminutive suffix -chen; and at the beginning of a word), [x] (after a, au, o, u), or [k] at the beginning of a word before a, o, u and consonants. Ch never occurs at the beginning of an originally German word. In borrowed words with initial Ch before front vowels (Chemie "chemistry" etc.), [ç] is considered standard. However, Upper Germans and Franconians (in the geographical sense) replace it with [k], as German as a whole does before darker vowels and consonants such as in Charakter, Christentum. Middle Germans (except Franconians) will borrow a [ʃ] from the French model. Both agree in considering each other's variant,[clarification needed] and Upper Germans also the standard in [ç], as particularly awkward and unusual. dsch is pronounced [d͡ʒ] (e.g. Dschungel /ˈd͡ʒʊŋəl/ "jungle") but appears in a few loanwords only. f is pronounced [f] as in "father". h is pronounced [h] as in "home" at the beginning of a syllable. After a vowel it is silent and only lengthens the vowel (e.g. Reh [ʁeː] = roe deer). j is pronounced [j] in Germanic words (Jahr [jaːɐ]) (like "y" in "year"). In recent loanwords, it follows more or less the respective languages' pronunciations. l is always pronounced [l], never *[ɫ] (the English "dark L"). q only exists in combination with u and is pronounced [kv]. It appears in both Germanic and Latin words (quer [kveːɐ̯]; Qualität [kvaliˈtɛːt]). But as most words containing q are Latinate, the letter is considerably rarer in German than it is in English. r is usually pronounced in a guttural fashion (a voiced uvular fricative [ʁ] or uvular trill [ʀ]) in front of a vowel or consonant (Rasen [ˈʁaːzən]; Burg [buʁk]). In spoken German, however, it is commonly vocalised after a vowel (er being pronounced rather like [ˈɛɐ] – Burg [buɐk]). In some varieties, the r is pronounced as a "tongue-tip" r (the alveolar trill [r]). s in German is pronounced [z] (as in "zebra") if it forms the syllable onset (e.g. Sohn [zoːn]), otherwise [s] (e.g. Bus [bʊs]). In Austria and Switzerland and often in Southern Germany, it is always pronounced [s]. A ss [s] indicates that the preceding vowel is short. st and sp at the beginning of words of German origin are pronounced [ʃt] and [ʃp], respectively. ß (a letter unique to German called scharfes S or Eszett) was a ligature of a double s and of an sz and is always pronounced [s]. Originating in Blackletter typeface, it traditionally replaced ss at the end of a syllable (e.g. ich muss → ich muß; ich müsste → ich müßte); within a word it contrasts with ss [s] in indicating that the preceding vowel is long (compare in Maßen [in ˈmaːsən] "with moderation" and in Massen [in ˈmasən] "in loads"). The use of ß has recently been limited by the latest German spelling reform and is no longer used for ss after a short vowel (e.g. ich muß and ich müßte were always pronounced with a short U/Ü); Switzerland and Liechtenstein already abolished it in 1934.[68] sch is pronounced [ʃ] (like "sh" in "shine"). tion in Latin loanwords is pronounced [tsion]. th is found, rarely, in loanwords and is pronounced [t] if the loanword is from Greek, and usually as in the original if the loanword is from English (though some, mostly older, speakers tend to replace the English th-sound with [s]). v is pronounced [f] in a limited number of words of Germanic origin, such as Vater [ˈfaːtɐ], Vogel "bird", von "from, of", vor "before, in front of", voll "full" and the prefix ver-. It is also used in loanwords, where it is normally pronounced [v]. This pronunciation is common in words like Vase, Vikar, Viktor, Viper, Ventil, vulgär, and English loanwords; however, pronunciation is [f] by some people in some in the very south. The only non-German word in which "v" is always pronounced "f" is Eva (Eve). w is pronounced [v] as in "vacation" (e.g. was [vas]). y is pronounced as [y] when long, and [ʏ] when short (as in Hygiene [hygiːnə] ; Labyrinth [labyˈʁɪnt] or Gymnasium /ɡʏmˈnaːziʊm/), except in ay and ey which are both pronounced [ai]. It is also often used in loanwords and pronounced like in the original language like in Style or Recycling. z is always pronounced [t͡s] (e.g. zog [t͡soːk]), except in loanwords. A tz indicates that the preceding vowel is short. Consonant shifts[edit] For more details on this topic, see High German consonant shift. German does not have any dental fricatives (as English th). The th sounds, which the English language still has, disappeared on the continent in German with the consonant shifts between the 8th and the 10th centuries.[69] It is sometimes possible to find parallels between English and German by replacing the English th with d in German: "Thank" → in German Dank, "this" and "that" → dies and das, "thou" (old 2nd person singular pronoun) → du, "think" → denken, "thirsty" → durstig and many other examples. Likewise, the gh in Germanic English words, pronounced in several different ways in modern English (as an f, or not at all), can often be linked to German ch: "to laugh" → lachen, "through" and "thorough" → durch, "high" → hoch, "naught" → nichts, "light" → leicht or Licht, "sight" → Sicht, "daughter" → Tochter, "neighbour" → Nachbar. Literature[edit] Main article: German literature The German language is used in German literature and can be traced back to the Middle Ages, with the most notable authors of the period being Walther von der Vogelweide and Wolfram von Eschenbach. The Nibelungenlied, whose author remains unknown, is also an important work of the epoch. The fairy tales collections collected and published by Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm in the 19th century became famous throughout the world. Reformer and theologian Martin Luther, who was the first to translate the Bible into German, is widely credited for having set the basis for the modern "High German" language. Among the most well known German poets and authors are Lessing, Goethe, Schiller, Kleist, Hoffmann, Brecht and Heine. Thirteen German-speaking people have won the Nobel Prize in literature: Theodor Mommsen, Rudolf Christoph Eucken, Paul von Heyse, Gerhart Hauptmann, Carl Spitteler, Thomas Mann, Nelly Sachs, Hermann Hesse, Heinrich Böll, Elias Canetti, Günter Grass, Elfriede Jelinek and Herta Müller. Johann Wolfgang von Goethe (1749–1832) Friedrich Schiller (1759–1805) Brothers Grimm (1785–1863) Thomas Mann (1875–1955) Hermann Hesse (1877–1962) German loanwords in the English language[edit] English has taken many loanwords from German, often without any change of spelling (aside from, often, the elimination of umlauts and not capitalizing nouns): German word English loanword Meaning of German word abseilen abseil to descend by rope / to fastrope Angst angst fear Ansatz ansatz onset / entry / math / approach Anschluss anschluss connection / access / annexation Automat automat automation / machine Bildungsroman bildungsroman novel concerned with the personal development or education of the protagonist Blitz Blitz flash / lightning Bratwurst bratwurst fried sausage Delikatessen delikatessen / delicatessen delicate / delicious food items Doppelgänger doppelgänger lit. "double going / living person alive", look-alike of somebody Dramaturg dramaturg professional position within a theatre or opera company that deals mainly with research and development of plays or operas Edelweiß edelweiss edelweiss flower Fest fest feast / celebration Gedankenexperiment gedankenexperiment thought experiment Geländesprung gelandesprung ski jumping for distance on alpine equipment Gemütlichkeit gemütlichkeit snug feeling, cosiness, good nature, geniality Gestalt gestalt form or shape / creature / scheme; refers to a concept of 'wholeness' Gesundheit! Gesundheit! (Amer.) health / bless you! (when someone sneezes) Heiligenschein heiligenschein meteo. "holy shine" / halo Hinterland hinterland lit. mil. "area behind the front-line": interior / backwoods kaputt kaput out of order, not working (from French, être capot "to have made no tricks in card games", lit. "to be hoodwinked") Katzenjammer katzenjammer lit. "cats' lament": hangover, crapulence Kindergarten kindergarten lit. "children's garden" – nursery or preschool Kitsch kitsch fake art, something produced exclusively for sale Kraut kraut herb, cabbage in some dialects Leitmotiv leitmotif guiding theme (the verb leiten means "to guide, to lead") plündern (v.) to plunder lit. "taking goods by force" (original meaning "to take away furniture" shifted in German and was borrowed by English both during the Thirty Years War) Poltergeist poltergeist lit. "rumbling ghost" Realpolitik realpolitik diplomacy based on practical objectives rather than ideals Reich reich empire or realm Rucksack rucksack backpack (Ruck → Rücken which means "back") Sauerkraut sauerkraut shredded and salted cabbage fermented in its own juice Schadenfreude schadenfreude taking pleasure in someone else's misfortune Sprachraum sprachraum lit. "place/area/room of a language": area where a certain language is spoken Über uber over, above Übermensch ubermensch superhuman, "overman" verklemmt verklemmt (Amer.) lit. "jammed": inhibited, uptight Waldsterben waldsterben lit. "forest dieback", dying floral environment Wanderlust wanderlust desire, pleasure, or inclination to travel or walk Weltanschauung weltanschauung lit. "perception of the world": ideology Wunderkind wunderkind lit. "wonder child": child prodigy, whiz kid Zeitgeist zeitgeist lit. "spirit of the times": the spirit of the age; the trend at that time Zugzwang Zugzwang chess term lit. "compulsion to move" Organisations[edit] The use and learning of the German language are promoted by a number of organisations. Goethe-Institut[edit] Main article: Goethe-Institut Goethe-Institut logo The government-backed Goethe-Institut[70] (named after the famous German author Johann Wolfgang von Goethe) aims to enhance the knowledge of German culture and language within Europe and the rest of the world. This is done by holding exhibitions and conferences with German-related themes, and providing training and guidance in the learning and use of the German language. For example, the Goethe-Institut teaches the Goethe-Zertifikat German language qualification. Verein Deutsche Sprache[edit] The Dortmund-based Verein Deutsche Sprache (VDS), which was founded in 1997, supports the German language and is the largest language association of citizens in the world. The VDS has more than thirty-five thousand members in over seventy countries. Its founder, statistics professor Dr. Walter Krämer, has remained chairperson of the association from its beginnings.[71] Deutsche Welle[edit] Main article: Deutsche Welle Deutsche Welle logo The German state broadcaster Deutsche Welle is the equivalent of the British BBC World Service and provides radio and television broadcasts in German and 30 other languages across the globe.[72] Its German language services are tailored for German language learners by being spoken at slow speed. Deutsche Welle also provides an e-learning website to learn German. See also[edit] Deutsch (disambiguation) German family name etymology German toponymy Germanism (linguistics) List of German exonyms List of German expressions in English List of non-English-language newspapers in New South Wales#German language newspapers List of pseudo-German words adapted to English List of terms used for Germans Names for the German language Otto Basler References[edit] ^ Mikael Parkvall, "Världens 100 största språk 2010" (The World's 100 Largest Languages in 2010), in Nationalencyklopedin ^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q Ammon, Ulrich (November 2014). "Die Stellung der deutschen Sprache in der Welt" (in German) (1st ed.). Berlin, Germany: de Gruyter. ISBN 978-3-11-019298-8. Retrieved 2015-07-24. [page needed] ^ a b c d e "Special Eurobarometer 386: Europeans and their languages" (PDF) (report). European Commission. June 2012. Retrieved 2015-07-24.  ^ "Rat für deutsche Rechtschreibung – Über den Rat". Rechtschreibrat.ids-mannheim.de. Retrieved 11 October 2010.  ^ a b c d Jan Goossens: Niederdeutsche Sprache: Versuch einer Definition. In: Jan Goossens (Hrsg.): Niederdeutsch: Sprache und Literatur. Karl Wachholtz, 2. Auflage, Neumünster 1983, S. 27; Willy Sanders: Sachsensprache, Hansesprache, Plattdeutsch: sprachgeschichtliche Grundzüge des Niederdeutschen. Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht, Göttingen 1982, ISBN 3-525-01213-6, S. 32 f.; Dieter Stellmacher: Niederdeutsche Sprache. 2. Auflage, Weidler, Berlin 2000, ISBN 3-89693-326-4, S. 92. ^ Nordhoff, Sebastian; Hammarström, Harald; Forkel, Robert; Haspelmath, Martin, eds. (2013). "High Franconian". Glottolog. Leipzig: Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary Anthropology.  ^ Nordhoff, Sebastian; Hammarström, Harald; Forkel, Robert; Haspelmath, Martin, eds. (2013). "Upper German". Glottolog. Leipzig: Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary Anthropology.  ^ "German 'should be a working language of EU', says Merkel's party". The Daily Telegraph. 18 June 2013.  ^ a b c Modern Language Association, February 2015, Enrollments in Languages Other Than English in United States Institutions of Higher Education, Fall 2013. Retrieved 2015-07-07. ^ "More than 80% of primary school pupils in the EU were studying a foreign language in 2013" (PDF). Eurostat. 2015-09-24. Retrieved 2016-05-03.  ^ "Why Learn German?". Goethe Institute. Retrieved 28 September 2014.  ^ "Usage Statistics of Content Languages for Websites, January 2015".  ^ "Why Learn German?". SDSU – German Studies Department of European Studies. Retrieved 28 September 2014.  ^ European Commission (2004). "Many tongues, one family. Languages in the European Union" (PDF). Europa (web portal). Retrieved 5 April 2013.  ^ Template:German L1 speakers outside Europe ^ a b c d Sum of Standard German, Swiss German, and all German dialects not listed under "Standard German" at Ethnologue (18th ed., 2015) ^ Calvin, Thomas. An Anthology of German Literature. D. C. Heath & co. pp. 5–6. OCLC 6128632.  ^ Fahlbusch, Erwin and Bromiley, Geoffrey William. The Encyclopedia of Christianity. Grand Rapids, MI: Leiden, Netherlands: Wm. B. Eerdmans; Brill, 1999–2003, 1:244. ^ Wilhelm Scherer, Zur Geschichte der deutschen Sprache [On the history of the German language] (Berlin 1868) ^ Jacob Grimm, Geschichte der deutschen Sprache (Leipzig 1848) ^ Anstalt G. Freytag & Berndt (1911). Geographischer Atlas zur Vaterlandskunde an der österreichischen Mittelschulen. Vienna: K. u. k. Hof-Kartographische. "Census December 31st 1910" ^ A magyar szent korona országainak 1910. évi népszámlálása. Első rész. A népesség főbb adatai. (in Hungarian). Budapest: Magyar Kir. Központi Statisztikai Hivatal (KSH). 1912. ^ Synopsis of the Deutsches Wörterbuch (English) at the Language Research Centre, Berlin-Brandenburg Academy of Sciences and Humanities, retrieved 27 June 2012. ^ Gerhard Weiss, Up-to-Date and with a Past: The "Duden" and Its History, 1995, The Publisher as Teacher, 6 DOI, online from jstor ^ Dieter Nerius: Die Rolle der II. Orthographischen Konferenz (1901) in der Geschichte der deutschen Rechtschreibung. In: Zeitschrift für deutsche Philologie (ISSN 0044-2496), 119. Jahrgang 2000, Nr. 1, S. 30-54. ^ Theodor Siebs: Deutsche Bühnenaussprache (zuletzt als: Deutsche Aussprache. Reine und gemässigte Hochlautung mit Aussprachewörterbuch. Hrsg. von Helmut de Boor. 19., umgearbeitete Auflage. VMA, Wiesbaden 2000, ISBN 3-928127-66-7) ^ Upward, Chris (1997). "Spelling Reform in German". Journal of the Simplified Spelling Society J21: 22–24, 36.  ^ a b c Eurostat – Foreign language learning statistics ^ Marten, Thomas; Sauer, Fritz Joachim, eds. (2005). Länderkunde – Deutschland, Österreich, Schweiz und Liechtenstein im Querschnitt [Regional Geography – An Overview of Germany, Austria, Switzerland and Liechtenstein] (in German). Berlin: Inform-Verlag. p. 7. ISBN 3-9805843-1-3.  ^ "The most spoken languages worldwide (speakers and native speaker in millions)". New York, USA: Statista, The Statistics Portal. Retrieved 2015-07-11. Native speakers=105, total speakers=185  ^ Ethnologue 18th Edition (2015) ^ Ethnic groups in Russia ^ U.S. Department of Commerce, Economics and Statistics Administration - Language Use in the United States: 2007 ^ a b c d e f g h i Council of Europe – List of ratifications of the Charter for regional/minority languages ^ Steinicke et al., "Autochthonous Linguistic Minorities in the Italian Alps", Journal of Alpine Research, 99-2, 2011 ^ Ethnologue 18th Edition (2015) – German as protected minority language according to the "Law of the Republic of Kazakhstan on Languages". See also: Demographics of Kazakhstan ^ "Map on page of Polish Commission on Standardization of Geographical Names" (PDF). Retrieved 20 June 2015.  ^ russia.bestpravo.com – Charter of the Azov German National District, establishing, amongst others, the German language to be protected, supported and promoted (Russian) ^ lefigaro.fr – Charte européenne des langues régionales : Hollande nourrit la guerre contre le français (06/05/2015) ^ a b c "Deutsch in Namibia" (PDF) (in German). Supplement of the Allgemeine Zeitung. 18 August 2007. Retrieved 23 June 2008.  ^ a b German L1 speakers outside Europe ^ South African Constitution – Chapter 1, Section 6 ^ "Table 5. Detailed List of Languages Spoken at Home for the Population 5 Years and Over by State: 2000" (PDF). Retrieved 15 March 2010.  ^ https://library.ndsu.edu/grhc/order/nd_sd/strasburg.html ^ Henry Steele Commager (1961). Immigration and American history: essays in honor of Theodore C. Blegen. University of Minnesota Press. p.102. ISBN 0-8166-5735-1 ^ 49.2 million German Americans as of 2005 according to the United States Census Bureau. "US demographic census". Retrieved 2 August 2007. ; the 1990 census gives 57.9 million, or 23.3% of the U.S. population. ^ Documentary History of the United States Brewers' Association.  ^ http://www.mla.org/cgi-shl/docstudio/docs.pl?map_data_results ^ a b "Statistics Canada 2006". 2.statcan.ca. 6 January 2010. Retrieved 15 March 2010.  ^ a b c d Instituto de Investigação e Desenvolvimento em Política Linguística – List of Brazilian municipalities with co-official languages, including Standard German as well as its dialects Hunsrückisch & Pomeranian ^ Legislative Assembly of the state of Espírito Santo (Comissioner for Culture and Social Communication – Addition to the constitutional amendment number 11/2009 establishing the Pomeranian dialect as well as German as cultural heritage of the state (February 2011) ^ a b Deutsch als Fremdsprache weltweit. Datenerhebung 2015 – Worldwide survey of people learning German; conducted by the German Ministry for Foreign Affairs and the Goethe Institute ^ Знание иностранных языков в России [Knowledge of foreign languages in Russia] (in Russian). Levada Centre. 16 September 2008. Retrieved 10 May 2015.  ^ "Foreign Language Enrollments in K–12 Public Schools" (PDF). American Council on the Teaching of Foreign Languages (ACTFL). February 2011. Retrieved October 17, 2015.  ^ von Polenz, Peter (1999). "6.5. Inter- und übernationale Beziehungen". Deutsche Sprachgeschichte vom Spätmittelalter bis zur Gegenwart. de Gruyter Studienbuch (in German). Band III: 19. und 20. Jahrhundert. Berlin; New York: de Gruyter. pp. 192–194, 196. ISBN 3-11-016426-4. Retrieved 21 August 2014.  ^ Ulrich Ammon, Hans Bickel, Jakob Ebner, et al.: Variantenwörterbuch des Deutschen. Die Standardsprache in Österreich, der Schweiz und Deutschland sowie in Liechtenstein, Luxemburg, Ostbelgien und Südtirol. Walter de Gruyter, Berlin 2004. ^ "Sprachen, Religionen – Daten, Indikatoren: Sprachen – Üblicherweise zu Hause gesprochene Sprachen" (official site) (in German, French, and Italian). Neuchâtel, Switzerland: Swiss Federal Statistical Office. 2015. Retrieved 2016-01-13. Zu Hause oder mit den Angehörigen sprechen 60,1% der betrachteten Bevölkerung hauptsächlich Schweizerdeutsch, 23,4% Französisch, 8,4% Italienisch, 10,1% Hochdeutsch und 4,6% Englisch  ^ nl:Nederduits ^ some of which might be reborrowings from Germanic Frankish ^ a phenomenon known in German as Denglisch or in English as Germish or Denglisch ^ Verein Deutsche Sprache e.V. "Verein Deutsche Sprache e.V. – Der Anglizismen-Index". Vds-ev.de. Retrieved 15 March 2010.  ^ "Ein Hinweis in eigener Sache". Wortschatz.informatik.uni-leipzig.de. 7 January 2003. Retrieved 15 March 2010.  ^ Gerhard Weiss (1995). "Up-to-Date and with a Past: The "Duden" and Its History" (PDF). Die Unterrichtspraxis / Teaching German (Wiley) 6 (1: The Publisher as Teacher): 7–21. doi:10.2307/3531328.  ^ Zur Definition und sprachwissenschaftlichen Abgrenzung insbesondere: Rudolf Muhr, Richard Schrodt, Peter Wiesinger (Hrsg.): Österreichisches Deutsch – Linguistische, sozialpsychologische und sprachpolitische Aspekte einer nationalen Variante des Deutschen (PDF, 407 Seiten; 1,3 MB), Verlag Hölder-Pichler-Tempsky, Wien 1995. Anm.: Diese Publikation entstand aus den Beiträgen der Tagung „Österreichisches Deutsch“, die mit internationalen Sprachwissenschaftlern an der Karl-Franzens-Universität Graz vom 22. bis 24. Mai 1995 stattfand. ^ Adolf Reinecke, Die deutsche Buchstabenschrift: ihre Entstehung und Entwicklung, ihre Zweckmäßigkeit und völkische Bedeutung, Leipzig, Hasert, 1910 ^ Facsimile of Bormann's Memorandum (in German) The memorandum itself is typed in Antiqua, but the NSDAP letterhead is printed in Fraktur. "For general attention, on behalf of the Führer, I make the following announcement: It is wrong to regard or to describe the so-called Gothic script as a German script. In reality, the so-called Gothic script consists of Schwabach Jew letters. Just as they later took control of the newspapers, upon the introduction of printing the Jews residing in Germany took control of the printing presses and thus in Germany the Schwabach Jew letters were forcefully introduced. Today the Führer, talking with Herr Reichsleiter Amann and Herr Book Publisher Adolf Müller, has decided that in the future the Antiqua script is to be described as normal script. All printed materials are to be gradually converted to this normal script. As soon as is feasible in terms of textbooks, only the normal script will be taught in village and state schools. The use of the Schwabach Jew letters by officials will in future cease; appointment certifications for functionaries, street signs, and so forth will in future be produced only in normal script. On behalf of the Führer, Herr Reichsleiter Amann will in future convert those newspapers and periodicals that already have foreign distribution, or whose foreign distribution is desired, to normal script". ^ Kapr, Albert (1993). Fraktur: Form und Geschichte der gebrochenen Schriften. Mainz: H. Schmidt. p. 81. ISBN 3-87439-260-0.  ^ "Mittelschulvorbereitung Deutsch". Mittelschulvorbereitung.ch. Retrieved 15 March 2010.  ^ For a history of the German consonants see Fausto Cercignani, The Consonants of German: Synchrony and Diachrony, Milano, Cisalpino, 1979. ^ "Learning German, Experiencing Culture – Goethe-Institut". Goethe.de. Retrieved 24 January 2012.  ^ "Verein Deutsche Sprache e.V.".  ^ "Who we are". DW.DE. 31 December 2011. Retrieved 14 June 2013.  Notes[edit] ^ The status of Low German as a German variety or separate language is subject to discussion.[5] ^ The status of Luxembourgish as a German variety or separate language is subject to discussion.[2] ^ The status of Plautdietsch as a German variety or separate language is subject to discussion.[5] Bibliography[edit] Fausto Cercignani, The Consonants of German: Synchrony and Diachrony, Milano, Cisalpino, 1979. Michael Clyne, The German Language in a Changing Europe (1995) ISBN 0-521-49970-4 George O. Curme, A Grammar of the German Language (1904, 1922) – the most complete and authoritative work in English Durrell, M (2006). "Germanic Languages". In Brown, Keith. Encyclopedia of language & linguistics. Elsevier. pp. 53–55. doi:10.1016/B0-08-044854-2/02189-1. ISBN 978-0-08-044299-0. Retrieved 6 February 2015. Lay summary (6 February 2015).  – via ScienceDirect (Subscription may be required or content may be available in libraries.) Anthony Fox, The Structure of German (2005) ISBN 0-19-927399-5 Harbert, Wayne (2007). The Germanic Languages. Cambridge Language Surveys. Cambridge University Press. doi:10.1017/CBO9780511755071. ISBN 978-0-521-01511-0. Retrieved 26 February 2015. Lay summary – Language (journal of the Linguistic Society of America) (26 February 2015).  König, Ekkehard; van der Auwera, Johan, eds. (1994). The Germanic Languages. Routledge Language Family Descriptions. Routledge. ISBN 978-0-415-28079-2. Retrieved 26 February 2015. Lay summary (26 February 2015).  The survey of the Germanic branch languages includes chapters by Winfred P. Lehmann, Ans van Kemenade, John Ole Askedal, Erik Andersson, Neil Jacobs, Silke Van Ness, and Suzanne Romaine. W.B. Lockwood, German Today: The Advanced Learner's Guide (1987) ISBN 0-19-815850-5 Ruth H. Sanders. German: Biography of a Language (Oxford University Press; 2010) 240 pages. Combines linguistic, anthropological, and historical perspectives in a "biography" of German in terms of six "signal events" over millennia, including the Battle of Kalkriese, which blocked the spread of Latin-based language north. External links[edit] Find more about German language at Wikipedia's sister projects Definitions from Wiktionary Media from Commons Quotations from Wikiquote Textbooks from Wikibooks Travel guide from Wikivoyage Learning resources from Wikiversity Data from Wikidata German edition of Wikisource, the free library German edition of Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Texts on Wikisource: "German Language". Encyclopædia Britannica (11th ed.). 1911.  Mark Twain, The Awful German Language, 1880 Carl Schurz, The German Mothertongue, 1897 "Germany, Language and Literature of". The American Cyclopædia. 1879.  German (language) at DMOZ Duden, the de-facto official German dictionary Leo, free online German dictionary v t e Languages of Germany Official langage Standard German Regional/Minority languages Recognized Danish Frisian North Saterland Low German Romani Sorbian Upper Lower Unrecognized Alemannic Bavarian Limburgish Low Rhenish Luxembourgish Sign languages German Sign Language v t e Languages of Austria Official language Austrian German Regional languages Burgenland Croatian Czech Hungarian Romani Slovak Slovene Unofficial dialects Alemannic Austro-Bavarian Sign languages Austrian Sign Language See Also: Minority languages of Austria v t e Languages of Switzerland Official languages French German Italian Romansh Major dialect groups Lombard Romand Sinte Swiss German Sign languages Swiss-German Sign French Sign Italian Sign v t e Modern Germanic languages and dialects North Germanic West Scandinavian Bergensk Elfdalian Faroese Gøtudanskt Icelandic Jamtlandic Norwegian Bokmål Nynorsk Sognamål Trøndersk Valdris Vestlandsk Vikværsk East Scandinavian Bornholmsk Dalecarlian Danish Insular Danish Jutlandic South Perkerdansk Gutnish Kalix Kebabnorsk Kiruna Luleå Norrland Småländska South Swedish Scanian Stockholm Rinkeby Uppländska Västgötska Westrobothnian Swedish Åland Estonia Finland Ostrobothnia West Germanic Anglo- Frisian English English dialects North Frisian Saterland Frisian Scots West Frisian Low Franconian Dutch Hollandic West Flemish/Zeelandic East Flemish/Brabantian Limburgish Meuse-Rhenish Afrikaans Low German/ Low Saxon Dutch Low Saxon Northern Low Saxon Westphalian Eastphalian Mecklenburgisch-Vorpommersch Brandenburgisch East Pomeranian Central Pomeranian Low Prussian High German Standard German German Swiss Austrian Central German Ripuarian Moselle Franconian Luxembourgish Lorraine Franconian Rhine Franconian Hessian Thuringian Upper Saxon Hessian dialects High Prussian South Markish Silesian Upper German East Franconian South Franconian Northern Bavarian Central Bavarian Southern Bavarian Swabian Low Alemannic Central Alemannic High Alemannic Highest Alemannic Swiss German Yiddish v t e Germany articles History Timeline Historiography Military history Germanic peoples Migration Period Frankish Empire Holy Roman Empire Ostsiedlung (East Colonisation) Confederation of the Rhine German Confederation Frankfurt Constitution North German Confederation Unification of Germany German Empire World War I Weimar Republic Nazi Germany World War II Divided Germany Allied occupation Flight and expulsions East Germany West Germany Reunification Reunified Germany Geography Administrative divisions States Districts Cities and towns Earthquakes Geology Islands Lakes Mountains Rivers Politics Bundestag Bundesrat Bundeswehr (military) Cabinet Chancellor Constitution Court system Elections Foreign relations Human rights Law Law enforcement Political parties President Economy Agriculture Automobile industry Banking Central bank Chemical Triangle Economic history Energy Exports German model German states by GDP Mining Mittelstand companies Science and technology Stock exchange Taxation Telecommunications Tourism Trade unions Transport Welfare Society Crime Demographics Drug policy Education Germans Ethnic groups Healthcare Immigration Pensions Religion Social issues Culture Anthem Architecture Art Arts Cinema Coat of arms Cuisine Dance Fashion Festivals Flag Language Literature Internet Media Music Names Philosophy Prussian virtues Sport Television World Heritage Outline Index Book Category Portal WikiProject v t e Languages of Europe Sovereign states Albania Andorra Armenia Austria Azerbaijan Belarus Belgium Bosnia and Herzegovina Bulgaria Croatia Cyprus Czech Republic Denmark Estonia Finland France Georgia Germany Greece Hungary Iceland Ireland Italy Kazakhstan Latvia Liechtenstein Lithuania Luxembourg Macedonia Malta Moldova Monaco Montenegro Netherlands Norway Poland Portugal Romania Russia San Marino Serbia Slovakia Slovenia Spain Sweden Switzerland Turkey Ukraine United Kingdom Vatican City States with limited recognition Abkhazia Kosovo Nagorno-Karabakh Republic Northern Cyprus South Ossetia Transnistria Dependencies and other territories Åland Faroe Islands Gibraltar Guernsey Jersey Isle of Man Svalbard Other entities European Union Language portal Germany portal Austria portal Switzerland portal European Union portal Authority control GND: 4113292-0 SUDOC: 027789829 NDL: 00561611 Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=German_language&oldid=718585828" Categories: German language German-speaking countries and territories Fusional languages High German languages Languages of Austria Languages of Belgium Languages of Denmark Languages of Germany Languages of Hungary Languages of Liechtenstein Languages of Luxembourg Languages of Namibia Languages of Switzerland Languages of Trentino-Alto Adige/Südtirol Stress-timed languages Subject–object–verb languages Subject–verb–object languages Verb-second languages Hidden categories: CS1 German-language sources (de) Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from December 2015 Articles containing German-language text Articles containing Hungarian-language text CS1 uses Russian-language script (ru) CS1 Russian-language sources (ru) Use dmy dates from June 2011 Languages with ISO 639-2 code Languages with ISO 639-1 code ISO language articles citing sources other than Ethnologue All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from February 2012 Wikipedia articles needing clarification from September 2012 Articles containing Latin-language text Articles with unsourced statements from June 2011 Articles containing potentially dated statements from August 2013 All articles containing potentially dated statements Articles with hAudio microformats Articles containing French-language text Pages containing links to subscription-or-libraries content Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from The American Cyclopaedia Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from The American Cyclopaedia with a Wikisource reference Articles with DMOZ links Wikipedia articles with GND identifiers Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Article Talk Variants Views Read Edit View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Featured content Current events Random article Donate to Wikipedia Wikipedia store Interaction Help About Wikipedia Community portal Recent changes Contact page Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Cite this page Print/export Create a book Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikibooks Wikiquote Wikivoyage Languages Acèh Адыгэбзэ Afrikaans Alemannisch አማርኛ Ænglisc Аҧсшәа العربية Aragonés ܐܪܡܝܐ Arpetan Asturianu Avañe'ẽ Aymar aru Azərbaycanca বাংলা Bân-lâm-gú Basa Banyumasan Башҡортса Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца)‎ भोजपुरी Bikol Central Български Boarisch བོད་ཡིག Bosanski Brezhoneg Буряад Català Чӑвашла Cebuano Čeština Corsu Cymraeg Dansk Deitsch Deutsch ދިވެހިބަސް Diné bizaad Dolnoserbski Eesti Ελληνικά Emiliàn e rumagnòl Эрзянь Español Esperanto Estremeñu Euskara فارسی Fiji Hindi Føroyskt Français Frysk Fulfulde Furlan Gaeilge Gaelg Gàidhlig Galego 贛語 ગુજરાતી 客家語/Hak-kâ-ngî Хальмг 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hornjoserbsce Hrvatski Ido Ilokano বিষ্ণুপ্রিয়া মণিপুরী Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Interlingue Ирон IsiXhosa IsiZulu Íslenska Italiano עברית Basa Jawa Kalaallisut ಕನ್ನಡ Къарачай-малкъар ქართული Kaszëbsczi Қазақша Kernowek Kinyarwanda Kiswahili Коми Kongo Kreyòl ayisyen Kurdî Кыргызча Ladino Лезги ລາວ لۊری شومالی Latgaļu Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvių Ligure Limburgs Lingála La .lojban. Lumbaart Magyar Македонски Malagasy മലയാളം Māori मराठी მარგალური مصرى مازِرونی Bahasa Melayu Baso Minangkabau Mìng-dĕ̤ng-ngṳ̄ Mirandés Мокшень Монгол မြန်မာဘာသာ Nāhuatl Dorerin Naoero Nederlands Nedersaksies नेपाली नेपाल भाषा 日本語 Napulitano Нохчийн Nordfriisk Norfuk / Pitkern Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Nouormand Novial Occitan Олык марий Oʻzbekcha/ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ Pälzisch Pangasinan پنجابی Papiamentu پښتو Перем Коми ភាសាខ្មែរ Picard Piemontèis Tok Pisin Plattdüütsch Polski Português Qaraqalpaqsha Qırımtatarca Reo tahiti Ripoarisch Română Romani Rumantsch Runa Simi Русиньскый Русский Саха тыла Sámegiella Gagana Samoa संस्कृतम् Sardu Scots Seeltersk Sesotho Sesotho sa Leboa Shqip Sicilianu Simple English SiSwati Slovenčina Slovenščina Словѣньскъ / ⰔⰎⰑⰂⰡⰐⰠⰔⰍⰟ Ślůnski Soomaaliga کوردیی ناوەندی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Basa Sunda Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் Tarandíne Татарча/tatarça తెలుగు Tetun ไทย Тоҷикӣ ᏣᎳᎩ Türkçe Türkmençe Удмурт Українська اردو Vahcuengh Vèneto Vepsän kel’ Tiếng Việt Volapük Võro Walon 文言 West-Vlams Winaray 吴语 ייִדיש Yorùbá 粵語 Zazaki Zeêuws Žemaitėška 中文 Edit links This page was last modified on 4 May 2016, at 11:34. Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view