Sprachraum - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Sprachraum From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to: navigation, search This article does not cite any sources. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (November 2008) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) This article possibly contains original research. Please improve it by verifying the claims made and adding inline citations. Statements consisting only of original research should be removed. (June 2012) In linguistics, a sprachraum (/ˈsprɑːkraʊm/; German: [ˈʃpʁaːxʁaʊm], "language area") is a geographical region where a common first language (mother tongue), with dialect varieties, or group of languages is spoken. Characteristics[edit] Most sprachraums do not follow national borders. For example, half of South America is part of the Spanish sprachraum, while a single, small country like Switzerland is at the intersection of four such language spheres. A sprachraum can also be separated by oceans. The four major Western sprachraums are those of English, Spanish, Portuguese and French (according to the number of speakers). The English sprachraum spans the globe, from the United Kingdom, Ireland, United States, Canada, Australia, and New Zealand to the many former British colonies where English has official language status alongside local languages, such as India and South Africa. The French sprachraum, which also spans several continents, is known as the Francophonie (French: La francophonie). La Francophonie is also the name of an international organisation composed of countries with French as an official language. The Portuguese sprachraum, for example, includes non-adjacent countries. The Lusosphere or Lusophony (Portuguese: Lusofonia), is a cultural entity that includes the countries where Portuguese is the official language, as well as the Portuguese diaspora. It also includes people who may not have any Portuguese ancestry but are culturally and linguistically linked to Portugal. The Community of Portuguese Language Countries or Community of Portuguese Speaking Countries (Portuguese: Comunidade dos Países de Língua Portuguesa, abbreviated to CPLP) is the intergovernmental organisation for friendship among Lusophone (Portuguese-speaking) nations where Portuguese is an official language. By extension, a sprachraum can also include a group of related languages. Thus the Scandinavian sprachraum includes Norway, Sweden, Denmark, Iceland, and the Faroe Islands, while the Finnic sprachraum is Finland, Estonia and adjacent areas of Scandinavia and Russia. Even within a single sprachraum, there can be different, but closely related, languages, otherwise known as dialect continua. A classic example is the varieties of Chinese, which can be mutually unintelligible in spoken form, but are typically considered the same language (or, at least, closely related) and have a unified non-phonetic writing system. Arabic has a similar situation, but its writing system (an abjad) reflects the pronunciation of a common literary language (Modern Standard Arabic). Examples[edit] Germanic languages Anglosphere (the English-speaking world) Dutch Language Union List of territorial entities where German is an official language Germanic Europe cluster (continental West Germanic and North Germanic) Romance languages Catalan Countries (the Catalan-speaking world) List of territorial entities where French is an official language Hispanophone world (where Spanish is spoken) Latin Europe Lusofonia (the Lusophone world) Other Indo-European languages Hindi belt Slavisphere Other languages Arab World Malay World Austronesia Sinophone world (where Chinese is spoken) See also[edit] Dialect continuum Sprachbund Lingua franca World language Pluricentric language Dachsprache Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Sprachraum&oldid=677730504" Categories: Languages Linguistics Hidden categories: Articles lacking sources from November 2008 All articles lacking sources Articles that may contain original research from June 2012 All articles that may contain original research Articles containing French-language text Articles containing Portuguese-language text Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Article Talk Variants Views Read Edit View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Featured content Current events Random article Donate to Wikipedia Wikipedia store Interaction Help About Wikipedia Community portal Recent changes Contact page Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Cite this page Print/export Create a book Download as PDF Printable version Languages Azərbaycanca Deutsch Français 한국어 Nederlands Нохчийн Русский Українська Edit links This page was last modified on 25 August 2015, at 05:06. Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view