Thailand - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Thailand From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to: navigation, search "Siam" redirects here. For other uses, see Siam (disambiguation). This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (March 2014) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) Coordinates: 15°24′N 101°18′E﻿ / ﻿15.4°N 101.3°E﻿ / 15.4; 101.3 Kingdom of Thailand ราชอาณาจักรไทย Ratcha-anachak Thai Flag Emblem Motto:  ชาติ ศาสนา พระมหากษัตริย์ (Thai) Chat, Satsana, Phra Maha Kasat "Nation, Religion, King" Anthem: Phleng Chat Thai (English: "Thai National Anthem") Sorry, your browser either has JavaScript disabled or does not have any supported player. You can download the clip or download a player to play the clip in your browser. Royal anthem: Sansoen Phra Barami (English: "Thai Royal Anthem") Sorry, your browser either has JavaScript disabled or does not have any supported player. You can download the clip or download a player to play the clip in your browser. Location of  Thailand  (green) in ASEAN  (dark grey)  –  [Legend] Capital and largest city Bangkok 13°45′N 100°29′E﻿ / ﻿13.750°N 100.483°E﻿ / 13.750; 100.483 Official languages Thai[1] Ethnic groups (2009[5]) 75–85% Thai (incl. Central Thai, Northeastern Thai[2] Northern Thai and Southern Thai)[3][4] 14% Thai Chinese 12% Others (incl. Malay, Mon, Khmer, "Hill tribes") Religion Buddhism Demonym Thai Siamese (archaic) Government Constitutional monarchy under military junta  •  Monarch Bhumibol Adulyadej  •  Prime Minister Prayut Chan-o-cha Legislature National Assembly (currently dissolved) Formation  •  Sukhothai Kingdom 1238–1448   •  Ayutthaya Kingdom 1351–1767   •  Thonburi Kingdom 1768–1782   •  Rattanakosin Kingdom 6 April 1782   •  Constitutional monarchy 24 June 1932   •  Current constitution 22 July 2014[6]  Area  •  Total 513,120 km2 (51st) 198,115 sq mi  •  Water (%) 0.4 (2,230 km2) Population  •  2015 estimate 67,959,000[7] (20th)  •  2010 census 64,785,909[8]  •  Density 132.1/km2 (88th) 342/sq mi GDP (PPP) 2015 estimate  •  Total US$1.108 trillion[9] (20th)  •  Per capita US$16,097[9] (75th) GDP (nominal) 2015 estimate  •  Total US$395.288 billion[9] (27th)  •  Per capita US$5,742[9] (88th) Gini (2010) 39.4[10] medium HDI (2014)  0.726[11] high · 93rd Currency Baht (฿) (THB) Time zone ICT (UTC+7) Drives on the left Calling code +66 ISO 3166 code TH Internet TLD .th .ไทย You may need rendering support to display the Thai text in this article correctly. Thailand (/ˈtaɪlænd/ TY-land or /ˈtaɪlənd/ TY-lənd;[12] Thai: ประเทศไทย, Paiboon transliteration: "bprà-têet tai", rtgs: Prathet Thai); IPA: [pra(ʔ)˨˩.tʰeːt̚˥˩ tʰaj˧] ( listen), officially the Kingdom of Thailand (Thai: ราชอาณาจักรไทย, Paiboon transliteration: "raa-chá aa-naa-jàk tai", rtgs: Ratcha-anachak Thai; IPA: [raː˧.t͡ɕʰa(ʔ)˦˥ ʔaː˧.naː˧.t͡ɕak̚˨˩ tʰaj˧] ( listen)), formerly known as Siam (Thai: สยาม; rtgs: Sayam), is a country at the centre of the Indochinese peninsula in Mainland Southeast Asia. It is bordered to the north by Myanmar and Laos, to the east by Laos and Cambodia, to the south by the Gulf of Thailand and Malaysia, and to the west by the Andaman Sea and the southern extremity of Myanmar. Its maritime boundaries include Vietnam in the Gulf of Thailand to the southeast, and Indonesia and India on the Andaman Sea to the southwest. Thailand is governed by the National Council for Peace and Order that took power in the May 2014 coup d'état.[13] Its monarchy is headed by King Bhumibol Adulyadej, who has reigned since 1946 as Rama IX, as he is the ninth monarch of the Chakri Dynasty. He is currently the world's longest-serving head of state and the country's longest-reigning monarch;[14] he has reigned for 7009220624560000000♠69 years, 333 days. With a total area of approximately 513,000 km2 (198,000 sq mi), Thailand is the world's 51st-largest country. It is the 20th-most-populous country in the world, with around 66 million people. The capital and largest city is Bangkok, which is Thailand's political, commercial, industrial, and cultural hub. About 75–95% of the population is ethnically Tai, which includes four major regional groups: central Thai, northeastern Thai (Khon [Lao] Isan),[2] northern Thai (Khon Mueang); and southern Thai. Thai Chinese, those of significant Chinese heritage, are 14% of the population,[5] while Thais with partial Chinese ancestry comprise up to 40% of the population.[15] Thai Malays represent 3% of the population, with the remainder consisting of Mons, Khmers and various "hill tribes". The country's official language is Thai and the primary religion is Theravada Buddhism, which is practised by around 95% of the population. Thailand experienced rapid economic growth between 1985 and 1996, becoming a newly industrialised country and a major exporter. Manufacturing, agriculture, and tourism are leading sectors of the economy.[16][17] Among the ten ASEAN countries, Thailand ranks third in quality of life.[11] and the country's HDI is rated as "high". Its large population and growing economic influence have made it a middle power in the region and around the world.[18] Contents 1 Etymology 1.1 Etymology of "Siam" 1.2 Etymology of "Thailand" 2 History 2.1 20th century 2.2 World War II 3 Politics and government 3.1 Constitutional history 3.2 28 June 1932 3.3 1932 to 1972 3.4 1973 to 1997 3.5 1997 to 2001 3.6 2001 to 2008 3.6.1 2006 coup d'état 3.7 2008–2010 political crisis 3.8 2013–2014 political crisis 3.9 2014 coup d'état 3.10 2014 to present 4 Administrative divisions 4.1 Southern region 5 Foreign relations 6 Armed forces 7 Geography 7.1 Climate 7.2 Wildlife 8 Education 9 Science and technology 9.1 Internet 10 Economy 10.1 Recent economic history 10.2 Exports and manufacturing 10.3 Tourism 10.4 Agriculture 10.5 Energy 10.6 Transportation 11 Demographics 11.1 Ethnic groups 11.2 Population centres 11.3 Language 11.4 Religion 12 Culture 12.1 Cuisine 12.2 Media 12.3 Units of measurement 13 Sports 13.1 Sporting venues 14 International rankings 15 See also 16 References 16.1 Bibliography 17 External links Etymology Etymology of "Siam" The country has always been called Mueang Thai by its citizens.[citation needed] By others[who?], it is known by the exonym Siam (Thai: สยาม rtgs: Sayam, pronounced [sàjǎːm], also spelled Siem, Syâm, or Syâma).[citation needed] The word Siam has been identified[by whom?] with the Sanskrit Śyāma (श्याम, meaning "dark" or "brown"). The names Shan and A-hom seem to be variants of the same word. The word Śyâma is possibly not its origin, but a learned and artificial distortion[clarification needed].[19] SPPM Mongkut Rex Siamensium, King Mongkut's signature The signature of King Mongkut (r. 1851 – 1868) reads SPPM (Somdet Phra Poramenthra Maha) Mongkut King of the Siamese, giving the name "Siam" official status until 23 June 1939 when it was changed to Thailand.[20] Thailand was renamed Siam from 1945 to 11 May 1949, after which it again reverted to Thailand. Etymology of "Thailand" According to George Cœdès, the word Thai (ไทย) means "free man" in the Thai language, "differentiating the Thai from the natives encompassed in Thai society as serfs."[21] A famous Thai scholar argued that Thai (ไท) simply means "people" or "human being", since his investigation shows that in some rural areas the word "Thai" was used instead of the usual Thai word "khon" (คน) for people.[22] While Thai people will often refer to their country using the polite form prathet Thai (Thai: ประเทศไทย), they most commonly use the more colloquial term mueang Thai (Thai: เมืองไทย) or simply Thai, the word mueang, archaically a city-state, commonly used to refer to a city or town as the centre of a region. Ratcha Anachak Thai (Thai: ราชอาณาจักรไทย) means "kingdom of Thailand" or "kingdom of Thai". Etymologically, its components are: ratcha (Sanskrit raja "king, royal, realm") ; -ana- (Pali āṇā "authority, command, power", itself from an Old Indo-Aryan form ājñā of the same meaning) -chak (from Sanskrit चक्र cakra- "wheel", a symbol of power and rule). The Thai National Anthem (Thai: เพลงชาติ), written by Luang Saranupraphan during the extremely patriotic 1930s, refers to the Thai nation as: prathet Thai (Thai: ประเทศไทย). The first line of the national anthem is: prathet thai ruam lueat nuea chat chuea thai (Thai: ประเทศไทยรวมเลือดเนื้อชาติเชื้อไทย), "Thailand is the unity of Thai flesh and blood." History Main article: History of Thailand There is evidence of human habitation in Thailand that has been dated at 40,000 years before the present, with stone artefacts dated to this period at Tham Lod Rockshelter in Mae Hong Son. Similar to other regions in Southeast Asia, Thailand was heavily influenced by the culture and religions of India, starting with the Kingdom of Funan around the 1st century CE to the Khmer Empire.[23] Thailand in its earliest days was under the rule of the Khmer Empire, which had strong Hindu roots, and the influence among Thais remains even today. The ruins of Wat Chaiwatthanaram at Ayutthaya. Indian influence on Thai culture was partly the result of direct contact with Indian settlers, but mainly it was brought about indirectly via the Indianized kingdoms of Dvaravati, Srivijaya, and Cambodia.[24] E:A Voretzsch believes that Buddhism must have been flowing into Siam from India in the time of the Indian Emperor Ashoka of the Maurya Empire and far on into the first millennium after Christ.[24] Later Thailand was influenced by the south Indian Pallava dynasty and north Indian Gupta Empire.[24] According to George Cœdès, "The Thai first enter history of Farther India in the eleventh century with the mention of Syam slaves or prisoners of war in" Champa epigraphy, and "in the twelfth century, the bas-reliefs of Angkor Wat" where "a group of warriors" are described as Syam. Additionally, "the Mongols, after the seizure of Ta-li on January 7, 1253 and the pacification of Yunnan in 1257, did not look with disfavor on the creation of a series of Thai principalities at the expense of the old Indianized kingdoms." The Menam Basin was originally populated by the Mons, and the location of Dvaravati in the 7th century, followed by the Khmer Empire in the 11th. The History of the Yuan mentions an embassy from the kingdom of Sukhothai in 1282. In 1287, three Thai chiefs, Mangrai, Ngam Muang, and Ram Khamhaeng formed a "strong pact of friendship".[25] After the fall of the Khmer Empire in the 13th century, various states thrived there, established by the various Tai peoples, Mons, Khmers, Chams and Ethnic Malays, as seen through the numerous archaeological sites and artefacts that are scattered throughout the Siamese landscape. Prior to the 12th century however, the first Thai or Siamese state is traditionally considered to be the Buddhist Sukhothai Kingdom, which was founded in 1238. Following the decline and fall of the Khmer empire in the 13th–15th century, the Buddhist Tai kingdoms of Sukhothai, Lanna, and Lan Xang (now Laos) were on the rise. However, a century later, the power of Sukhothai was overshadowed by the new Kingdom of Ayutthaya, established in the mid-14th-century in the lower Chao Phraya River or Menam area. Stupas, Ayutthaya Historical Park. Ayutthaya's expansion centred along the Menam while in the northern valleys the Lanna Kingdom and other small Tai city-states ruled the area. In 1431, the Khmer abandoned Angkor after Ayutthaya forces invaded the city.[26] Thailand retained a tradition of trade with its neighbouring states, from China to India, Persia, and Arab lands. Ayutthaya became one of the most vibrant trading centres in Asia. European traders arrived in the 16th century, beginning with the Portuguese, followed by the French, Dutch, and English. The Burmese–Siamese War (1765–1767) left Ayutthaya burned and sacked by King Hsinbyushin. After the fall of Ayutthaya in 1767 to the Burmese, Taksin moved the capital to Thonburi for approximately 15 years. The current Rattanakosin era of Thai history began in 1782 following the establishment of Bangkok as capital of the Chakri Dynasty under King Rama I the Great. According to the Encyclopædia Britannica, "A quarter to a third of the population of some areas of Thailand and Burma were slaves in the 17th through the 19th centuries."[27][28] Despite European pressure, Thailand is the only Southeast Asian nation to never have been colonised.[29] This has been ascribed to the long succession of able rulers in the past four centuries who exploited the rivalry and tension between French Indochina and the British Empire. As a result, the country remained a buffer state between parts of Southeast Asia that were colonised by the two colonial powers, Great Britain and France. Western influence nevertheless led to many reforms in the 19th century and major concessions, most notably the loss of a large territory on the east side of the Mekong to the French and the step-by-step absorption by Britain of the Shan and Karen people areas and Malay Peninsula. 20th century The losses[which?] initially included Penang and eventually culminated in the loss of four predominantly ethnic-Malay southern provinces, which later became Malaysia's four northern states, under the Anglo-Siamese Treaty of 1909. In 1932, a bloodless revolution carried out by the Khana Ratsadon group of military and civilian officials resulted in a transition of power, when King Prajadhipok was forced to grant the people of Siam their first constitution, thereby ending centuries of absolute monarchy. In 1939, the name of the kingdom, "Siam", was changed to "Thailand". World War II Main article: Thailand in World War II During World War II, the Empire of Japan demanded the right to move troops across Thailand to the Malayan frontier. The Japanese invasion of Thailand on 8 December 1941 occurred in co-ordination with attacks throughout Asia and engaged the Royal Thai Army for six to eight hours before Plaek Phibunsongkhram ordered an armistice. Shortly thereafter, Japan was granted free passage, and on 21 December 1941, Thailand and Japan signed a military alliance with a secret protocol, wherein Tokyo agreed to help Thailand regain territories lost to the British and French.[30] Subsequently, Thailand declared war on the United States and the United Kingdom on 25 January 1942, and undertook to "assist" Japan in its war against the Allies, while at the same time maintaining an active anti-Japanese Free Thai Movement. Approximately 200,000 Asian labourers (mainly romusha) and 60,000 Allied prisoners of war (POWs) worked on the Burma Railway, which is commonly known as the "Death Railway".[30] After the war, Thailand emerged as an ally of the United States. As with many of the developing nations during the Cold War, Thailand then went through decades of political instability characterised by a number of coups d'état, as one military regime replaced another, but eventually progressed towards a stable, prosperous democracy in the 1980s.[citation needed] Pottery discovered near Ban Chiang in Udon Thani Province, the earliest dating to 2100 BCE. Phimai, Prasat Phimai is the largest temple in the country from the Khmer Empire. The immense 19-metre-high (62-foot) gilded statue of a seated Buddha in Wat Phanan Choeng, the latter from 1324, pre-dates the founding of the city of Ayutthaya A 15 metres (49 feet) Buddha image in Sukhothai, Phra Achana , built in the 13th century Painting of Ayutthaya, ordered by the Dutch East India Company, 1665. Kosa Pan present King Narai's letter to Louis XIV at Versailles, 1 September 1686. Politics and government Main articles: Politics of Thailand, Constitutions of Thailand, Law of Thailand and Government of Thailand The politics of Thailand is currently conducted within the framework of a constitutional monarchy, whereby the Prime Minister is the head of government and a hereditary monarch is head of state. The judiciary is supposed to be independent of the executive and the legislative branches, although judicial rulings are suspected of being based on political considerations rather than on existing law.[31] Constitutional history Bangkok's Democracy Monument: a representation of the 1932 Constitution sits on top of two golden offering bowls above a turret. Since the political reform of the absolute monarchy in 1932, Thailand has had 19 constitutions and charters.[32][33] Throughout this time, the form of government has ranged from military dictatorship to electoral democracy, but all governments have acknowledged a hereditary monarch as the head of state.[34][35] 28 June 1932 Prior to 1932, the Kingdom of Siam did not possess a legislature, as all legislative powers were vested in the person of the monarch. This had been the case since the foundation of the Sukhothai Kingdom in the 12th century as the king was seen as a "Dharmaraja" or "king who rules in accordance with Dharma", (the Buddhist law of righteousness). However, on 24 June 1932 a group of civilians and military officers, calling themselves the Khana Ratsadon (or People's Party) carried out a bloodless revolution in which the 150 years of absolute rule of the Chakri Dynasty ended. In its stead the group advocated a constitutional form of monarchy with an elected legislature. The "Draft Constitution" of 1932 signed by King Prajadhipok created Thailand's first legislature, a People's Assembly with 70 appointed members. The assembly met for the first time on 28 June 1932, in the Ananta Samakhom Throne Hall. The Khana Ratsadon decided that the people were not yet ready for an elected assembly. They later changed their minds. By the time the "permanent" constitution came into force in December of that year, elections were scheduled for 15 November 1933. The new constitution changed the composition of the assembly to 78 directly elected and 78 appointed (by the Khana Ratsadon), together totalling 156 members. 1932 to 1972 This section requires expansion. (November 2013) See also: History of Thailand (1932–1973) and History of Thailand since 1973 The history of Thailand from 1932 to 1973 was dominated by military dictatorships which were in power for much of the period. The main personalities of the period were the dictator Luang Phibunsongkhram (better known as Phibun), who allied the country with Japan during the Second World War, and the civilian politician Pridi Phanomyong, who founded Thammasat University and was briefly the prime minister after the war. The Japanese invasion of Thailand occurred on 8 December 1941. A succession of military dictators followed Pridi's ousting — Phibun again, Sarit Dhanarajata and Thanom Kittikachorn — under whom traditional, authoritarian rule was combined with increasing modernisation and westernisation under the influence of the US. The end of the period was marked by Thanom's resignation, following a massacre of pro-democracy protesters led by Thammasat students. Thanom misread the situation as a coup d'état, and fled, leaving the country leaderless. HM appointed Thammasat University chancellor Sanya Dharmasakti PM by royal command. For events subsequent to the abdication of the king, including the name change of 1939, up to the coup d'état of 1957, see Plaek Pibulsonggram. Thailand helped the USA and South Vietnam in the Vietnam War between 1965–1971. The USAF based F-4 Phantom fighters at Udon and Ubon Air Base, and stationed B-52s at U-Tapao. Thai forces also saw heavy action in the covert war in Laos that occurred from 1964 to 1972. 1973 to 1997 This section requires expansion. (November 2013) See also: History of Thailand since 1973 1997 to 2001 See also: 1997 Constitution of Thailand Ananta Samakhom Throne Hall, the old meeting place of the National Assembly; now only the State Opening is held there. Parliament House, the meeting place of the two chambers of the National Assembly of Thailand The 1997 Constitution was the first constitution to be drafted by popularly elected Constitutional Drafting Assembly, and was popularly called the "people's constitution".[36] The 1997 Constitution created a bicameral legislature consisting of a 500-seat House of Representatives (สภาผู้แทนราษฎร, sapha phu thaen ratsadon) and a 200-seat Senate (วุฒิสภา, wutthisapha). For the first time in Thai history, both houses were directly elected. Many human rights were explicitly acknowledged, and measures were established to increase the stability of elected governments. The House was elected by the first past the post system, where only one candidate with a simple majority could be elected in one constituency. The Senate was elected based on the provincial system, where one province could return more than one senator depending on its population size. The two houses of the National Assembly have two different terms. In accordance with the constitution the Senate is elected to a six-year term, while the House is elected to a four-year term. Overall the term of the National Assembly is based on that of the House. The National Assembly each year will sit in two sessions: an "ordinary session" and a "legislative session". The first session of the National Assembly must take place within thirty days after the general election of the House of Representatives. The first session must be opened by the king in person by reading a Speech from the Throne; this ceremony is held in the Ananta Samakhom Throne Hall. He may also appoint the crown prince or a representative to carry out this duty. It is also the duty of the king to prorogue sessions through a royal decree when the House term expires. The king also has the prerogative to call extraordinary sessions and prolong sessions upon advice of the House of Representatives. The National Assembly may host a "joint-sitting" of both Houses under several circumstances. These include: The appointment of a regent, any alteration to the 1924 Palace Law of Succession, the opening of the first session, the announcement of policies by the Cabinet of Thailand, the approval of the declaration of war, the hearing of explanations and approval of a treaty and the amendment of the Constitution. Members of the House of Representatives served four-year terms, while senators served six-year terms. The 1997 People's Constitution also promoted human rights more than any other constitution. The court system (ศาล, san) included a constitutional court with jurisdiction over the constitutionality of parliamentary acts, royal decrees, and political matters. 2001 to 2008 The January 2001 general election, the first election under the 1997 Constitution, was called the most open, corruption-free election in Thai history.[37] Thai Rak Thai Party, led by Thaksin Shinawatra won the election. The Thaksin government was the first in Thai history to complete a four-year term. The 2005 election had the highest voter turnout in Thai history,[38][39] and Thai Rak Thai Party won an absolute majority. However, despite efforts to clean up the system, vote buying and electoral violence remained electoral problems in 2005.[40] The PollWatch Foundation, Thailand's most prominent election watchdog, declared that vote buying in this election, specifically in the north and the northeast, was more serious than in the 2001 election. The organisation also accused the government of violating the election law by abusing state power in presenting new projects in a bid to seek votes. 2006 coup d'état See also: 2006 Thai coup d'état Without meeting much resistance, a military junta overthrew the interim government of Thaksin Shinawatra on 19 September 2006. The junta abrogated the constitution, dissolved Parliament and the Constitutional Court, detained and later removed several members of the government, declared martial law, and appointed one of the king's Privy Counselors, General Surayud Chulanont, as the Prime Minister. The junta later wrote a highly abbreviated interim constitution and appointed a panel to draft a new permanent constitution. The junta also appointed a 250-member legislature, called by some critics a "chamber of generals" while others claimed that it lacks representatives from the poor majority.[41][42] In this interim constitution draft, the head of the junta was allowed to remove the prime minister at any time. The legislature was not allowed to hold a vote of confidence against the cabinet and the public was not allowed to file comments on bills.[43] This interim constitution was later surpassed by the permanent constitution on 24 August 2007. Martial law was partially revoked in January 2007. The ban on political activities was lifted in July 2007,[44] following the 30 May dissolution of the Thai Rak Thai party. The new constitution was approved by referendum on 19 August, which led to a return to a democratic general election on 23 December 2007. 2008–2010 political crisis See also: 2008–2010 Thai political crisis People's Alliance for Democracy, Yellow shirts, rally on Sukhumvit Road in 2008. United Front for Democracy Against Dictatorship, Red Shirts, protest on Ratchaprasong intersection in 2010. The People's Power Party (Thailand), led by Samak Sundaravej formed a government with five smaller parties. Following several court rulings against him in a variety of scandals, and surviving a vote of no confidence, and protesters blockading government buildings and airports, in September 2008, Sundaravej was found guilty of conflict of interest by the Constitutional Court of Thailand (due to being a host in a TV cooking program),[45] and thus, ended his term in office. He was replaced by PPP member Somchai Wongsawat. As of October 2008, Wongsawat was unable to gain access to his offices, which were occupied by protesters from the People's Alliance for Democracy. On 2 December 2008, Thailand's Constitutional Court in a highly controversial ruling found the Peoples Power Party[46] guilty of electoral fraud, which led to the dissolution of the party according to the law. It was later alleged in media reports that at least one member of the judiciary had a telephone conversation with officials working for the Office of the Privy Council and one other. The phone call was taped and has since circulated on the Internet. In it, the callers discuss finding a way to ensure the ruling PPP party would be disbanded. Accusations of judicial interference were levelled in the media but the recorded call was dismissed as a hoax. However, in June 2010, supporters of the eventually disbanded PPP were charged with tapping a judge's phone. Immediately following what many media described as a "judicial coup", a senior member of the Armed Forces met with factions of the governing coalition to get their members to join the opposition and the Democrat Party was able to form a government, a first for the party since 2001. The leader of the Democrat party, and former leader of the opposition, Abhisit Vejjajiva was appointed and sworn-in as the 27th Prime Minister, together with the new cabinet on 17 December 2008. In April 2009, protests by the National United Front of Democracy Against Dictatorship (UDD, or "Red Shirts") forced the cancellation of the Fourth East Asia Summit after protesters stormed the Royal Cliff hotel venue in Pattaya, smashing the glass doors of the venue to gain entry, and a blockade prevented the Chinese premier at the time, Wen Jiabao, from attending. The summit was eventually held in Thailand in October 2009.[47][48] About a year later, a set of new "Red Shirts" protests resulted in 87 deaths (mostly civilian and some military) and 1,378 injured.[49] When the army tried to disperse the protesters on 10 April 2010, the army was met with automatic gunfire, grenades, and fire bombs from the opposition faction in the army, known as the "watermelon". This resulted in the army returning fire with rubber bullets and some live ammunition. During the time of the "red shirt" protests against the government, there have been numerous grenade and bomb attacks against government offices and the homes of government officials. Gas grenades were fired at "yellow-shirt" protesters, that were protesting against the "red-shirts" and in favour of the government, by unknown gunmen killing one pro-government protester, the government stated that the Red Shirts were firing the weapons at civilians.[50][51][52][53] Red-shirts continued to hold a position in the business district of Bangkok and it was shut down for several weeks.[54] On 3 July 2011, the oppositional Pheu Thai Party, led by Yingluck Shinawatra (the youngest sister of Thaksin Shinawatra), won the general election by a landslide (265 seats in the House of Representatives, out of 500). She had never previously been involved in politics, Pheu Thai campaigning for her with the slogan 'Thaksin thinks, Pheu Thai acts'. Yingluck is the nation's first female prime minister and her role was officially endorsed in a ceremony presided over by King Bhumibol Adulyadej. The Pheu Thai Party is a continuation of Thaksin's Thai Rak Thai party.[55] 2013–2014 political crisis Main article: 2013–14 Thai political crisis Protests recommenced in late 2013, as a broad alliance of protestors, led by former opposition deputy leader Suthep Thaugsuban, demanded an end to the so-called Thaksin regime. A blanket amnesty for people involved in the 2010 protests, altered at the last minute to include all political crimes – including all convictions against Thaksin – triggered a mass show of discontent, with numbers variously estimated between 98,500 (the police) and 400,000 (an aerial photo survey done by the Bangkok Post), taking to the streets. The Senate was urged to reject the bill to quell the reaction, but the measure failed. A newly named group, the People's Democratic Reform Committee (PDRC) along with allied groups, escalated the pressure, with the opposition Democrat party resigning en masse to create a parliamentary vacuum. Protesters demands variously evolved as the movement's numbers grew, extending a number of deadlines and demands that became increasingly unreasonable or unrealistic, yet attracting a groundswell of support. They called for the establishment of an indirectly elected “people’s council”—in place of Yingluck's government—that will cleanse Thai politics and eradicate the Thaksin regime.[56] In response to the intensive protests, Yingluck dissolved parliament on 9 December 2013 and proposed a new election for 2 February 2014, a date that was later approved by the election commission.[57] The PDRC insisted that the prime minister stand down within 24 hours, regardless of her actions, with 160,000 protesters in attendance at Government House on 9 December. Yingluck insisted that she would continue her duties until the scheduled election in February 2014, urging the protesters to accept her proposal: "Now that the government has dissolved parliament, I ask that you stop protesting and that all sides work towards elections. I have backed down to the point where I don't know how to back down any further."[58] In response to the Electoral Commission (EC)'s registration process for party-list candidates—for the scheduled election in February 2014—anti-government protesters marched to the Thai-Japanese sports stadium, the venue of the registration process, on 22 December 2013. Suthep and the PDRC led the protest, of which security forces claimed that approximately 270,000 protesters joined. Yingluck and the Pheu Thai Party reiterated their election plan and anticipate presenting a list of 125 party-list candidates to the EC.[59] On 7 May 2014, the Constitutional Court ruled that Yingluck would have to step down as the Prime Minister as she was deemed to have abused her power in transferring a high-level government official.[60] On 21 August 2014 she was replaced by army chief General Prayut Chan-o-cha.[61] 2014 coup d'état Main article: 2014 Thai coup d'état On 20 May 2014 the Thai army declared martial law and began to deploy troops in the capital, denying that it was a coup attempt.[62] On 22 May, the army admitted that it was a coup and that it was taking control of the country and suspending the country's constitution.[63][64] On the same day, the military imposed a curfew between the hours of 22:00–05:00, ordering citizens and visitors to remain indoors during this period.[65][66][67][68][69] On 21 August 2014 the National Assembly of Thailand elected the army chief, General Prayut Chan-o-cha, as prime minister. Martial law was declared formally ended on 1 April 2015.[70] "Uniformed or ex-military men have led Thailand for 55 of the 83 years since absolute monarchy was overthrown in 1932,..." observed one journalist from the vantage point of 2015.[71] 2014 to present The ruling junta led by Prayuth Chan-o-cha promised to hold new elections, but wants to enact a new constitution before the elections are held. An initial draft constitution was rejected by government officials in 2015. A national referendum, the first since the 2014 coup, on a newly drafted constitution is scheduled for early August 2016.[72] The new draft constitution would grant the constitutional court final authority in times of crisis, a power previously held by the King. The draft would also allow a person other than a member of parliament to be the prime minister, which would open the prime minister post to a military official. However, there remain deep disagreements regarding how much power should rest with the democratically elected government.[73] There are indications that public debate in the run up to the referendum will be severely curtailed by the military government.[72] The head of the Thai army, Gen. Theerachai Nakvanich, has announced the setting up of re-education camps for criitcs of the regime, "aimed at people who are still unable to understand the workings of the government and the National Council for Peace and Order".[74] Administrative divisions Thailand is divided into 76 provinces (จังหวัด, changwat), which are gathered into five groups of provinces by location. There are also two specially-governed districts: the capital Bangkok (Krung Thep Maha Nakhon) and Pattaya. Bangkok is at provincial level and thus often counted as a province. Each province is divided into districts and the districts are further divided into sub-districts (tambons). As of 2006[update] there were 877 districts (อำเภอ, amphoe) and the 50 districts of Bangkok (เขต, khet). Some parts of the provinces bordering Bangkok are also referred to as Greater Bangkok (ปริมณฑล, pari monthon). These provinces include Nonthaburi, Pathum Thani, Samut Prakan, Nakhon Pathom and Samut Sakhon. The name of each province's capital city (เมือง, mueang) is the same as that of the province. For example, the capital of Chiang Mai Province (Changwat Chiang Mai) is Mueang Chiang Mai or Chiang Mai. A clickable map of Thailand exhibiting its provinces. Southern region See also: South Thailand insurgency Southern provinces of Thailand showing the Malay-Muslim majority areas. Thailand controlled the Malay Peninsula as far south as Malacca in the 15th century and held much of the peninsula, including Temasek (Singapore), some of the Andaman Islands, and a colony on Java, but eventually contracted when the British used force to guarantee their suzerainty over the sultanate. Mostly the northern states of the Malay Sultanate presented annual gifts to the Thai king in the form of a golden flower—a gesture of tribute and an acknowledgement of vassalage. The British intervened in the Malay State and with the Anglo-Siamese Treaty tried to build a railway from the south to Bangkok. Thailand relinquished sovereignty over what are now the northern Malay provinces of Kedah, Perlis, Kelantan, and Terengganu to the British. Satun and Pattani Provinces were given to Thailand. The Malay peninsular provinces were occupied by the Japanese during World War II, and infiltrated by the Malayan Communist Party (CPM) from 1942 to 2008, when they sued for peace with the Malaysian and Thai governments after the CPM lost its support from Vietnam and China subsequent to the Cultural Revolution. Recent insurgent uprisings may be a continuation of separatist fighting which started after World War II with Sukarno's support for the PULO. Most victims since the uprisings have been Buddhist and Muslim bystanders. Foreign relations Main article: Foreign relations of Thailand The foreign relations of Thailand are handled by the Minister of Foreign Affairs. Thailand participates fully in international and regional organisations. It is a major non-NATO ally and Priority Watch List Special 301 Report of the United States. The country remains an active member of ASEAN Association of Southeast Asian Nations. Thailand has developed increasingly close ties with other ASEAN members: Indonesia, Malaysia, the Philippines, Singapore, Brunei, Laos, Cambodia, Myanmar, and Vietnam, whose foreign and economic ministers hold annual meetings. Regional co-operation is progressing in economic, trade, banking, political, and cultural matters. In 2003, Thailand served as APEC (Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation) host. Dr. Supachai Panitchpakdi, the former Deputy Prime Minister of Thailand, currently serves as Secretary-General of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD). In 2005 Thailand attended the inaugural East Asia Summit. In recent years, Thailand has taken an increasingly active role on the international stage. When East Timor gained independence from Indonesia, Thailand, for the first time in its history, contributed troops to the international peacekeeping effort. Its troops remain there today as part of a UN peacekeeping force. As part of its effort to increase international ties, Thailand has reached out to such regional organisations as the Organization of American States (OAS) and the Organisation for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE). Thailand has contributed troops to reconstruction efforts in Afghanistan and Iraq. Thaksin initiated negotiations for several free trade agreements with China, Australia, Bahrain, India, and the US. The latter especially was criticised, with claims that uncompetitive Thai industries could be wiped out.[75] Thaksin also announced that Thailand would forsake foreign aid, and work with donor countries to assist in the development of neighbours in the Greater Mekong Sub-region.[76] Thaksin sought to position Thailand as a regional leader, initiating various development projects in poorer neighbouring countries like Laos. More controversially, he established close, friendly ties with the Burmese dictatorship.[77] Thailand joined the US-led invasion of Iraq, sending a 423-strong humanitarian contingent.[78] It withdrew its troops on 10 September 2004. Two Thai soldiers died in Iraq in an insurgent attack. Abhisit appointed Peoples Alliance for Democracy leader Kasit Piromya as foreign minister. In April 2009, fighting broke out between Thai and Cambodian troops on territory immediately adjacent to the 900-year-old ruins of Cambodia's Preah Vihear Hindu temple near the border. The Cambodian government claimed its army had killed at least four Thais and captured 10 more, although the Thai government denied that any Thai soldiers were killed or injured. Two Cambodian and three Thai soldiers were killed. Both armies blamed the other for firing first and denied entering the other's territory.[79][80] Armed forces Main article: Royal Thai Armed Forces The HTMS Chakri Naruebet, an aircraft carrier of the Royal Thai Navy. The Royal Thai Armed Forces (Thai: กองทัพไทย, Kong Thap Thai) constitute the military of the Kingdom of Thailand. It consists of the Royal Thai Army (กองทัพบกไทย), the Royal Thai Navy (กองทัพเรือไทย), and the Royal Thai Air Force (กองทัพอากาศไทย). It also incorporates various paramilitary forces. The Thai Armed Forces have a combined manpower of 306,000 active duty personnel and another 245,000 active reserve personnel.[81] The head of the Thai Armed Forces (จอมทัพไทย, Chom Thap Thai) is the king,[82] although this position is only nominal. The armed forces are managed by the Ministry of Defence of Thailand, which is headed by the Minister of Defence (a member of the cabinet of Thailand) and commanded by the Royal Thai Armed Forces Headquarters, which in turn is headed by the Chief of Defence Forces of Thailand.[83] In 2011, Thailand's known military expenditure totalled approximately US$5.1 billion.[84] According to the constitution, serving in the armed forces is a duty of all Thai citizens.[85] However, only males over the age of 21, who have not gone through reserve training of the Army Reserve Force Students, are given the option of volunteering for the armed forces, or participating in the random draft. The candidates are subjected to varying lengths of training, from six months to two years of full-time service, depending on their education, whether they have partially completed the reserve training course, and whether they volunteered prior to the draft date (usually 1 April every year). Candidates with a recognised bachelor's degree serve one year of full-time service if they are conscripted, or six months if they volunteer at their district office (สัสดี, satsadi). Likewise, the training length is also reduced for those who have partially completed the three-year reserve training course (ร.ด., ro do). A person who completed one year out of three will only have to serve full-time for one year. Those who completed two years of reserve training will only have to do six months of full-time training, while those who complete three years or more of reserve training will be exempted entirely. Royal Thai Armed Forces Day is celebrated on 18 January, commemorating the victory of Naresuan of the Ayutthaya Kingdom in battle against the crown prince of the Taungoo Dynasty in 1593.[citation needed] Geography Main article: Geography of Thailand Thailand map of Köppen climate classification. View of the Luang Prabang Range, which straddles the Thai-Lao border, in Nan Province, Northern Thailand Totalling 513,120 square kilometres (198,120 sq mi),[1] Thailand is the world's 51st-largest country by total area. It is slightly smaller than Yemen and slightly larger than Spain. Satellite image of flooding in Thailand, Oct 2011. Thailand comprises several distinct geographic regions, partly corresponding to the provincial groups. The north of the country is the mountainous area of the Thai highlands, with the highest point being Doi Inthanon in the Thanon Thong Chai Range at 2,565 metres (8,415 ft) above sea level. The northeast, Isan, consists of the Khorat Plateau, bordered to the east by the Mekong River. The centre of the country is dominated by the predominantly flat Chao Phraya river valley, which runs into the Gulf of Thailand. Southern Thailand consists of the narrow Kra Isthmus that widens into the Malay Peninsula. Politically, there are six geographical regions which differ from the others in population, basic resources, natural features, and level of social and economic development. The diversity of the regions is the most pronounced attribute of Thailand's physical setting. The Chao Phraya and the Mekong River are the indispensable water courses of rural Thailand. Industrial scale production of crops use both rivers and their tributaries. The Gulf of Thailand covers 320,000 square kilometres (124,000 sq mi) and is fed by the Chao Phraya, Mae Klong, Bang Pakong, and Tapi Rivers. It contributes to the tourism sector owing to its clear shallow waters along the coasts in the southern region and the Kra Isthmus. The eastern shore of the Gulf of Thailand is an industrial centre of Thailand with the kingdom's premier deepwater port in Sattahip and its busiest commercial port, Laem Chabang. The Andaman Sea is a precious natural resource as it hosts the most popular and luxurious resorts in Asia. Phuket, Krabi, Ranong, Phang Nga, and Trang and their islands all lay along the coasts of the Andaman Sea and despite the 2004 tsunami, they are a tourist magnet for visitors from around the world. Plans have resurfaced for a canal which would connect the Andaman Sea to the Gulf of Thailand, analogous to the Suez and the Panama Canals. The idea has been greeted positively by Thai politicians as it would cut fees charged by the Ports of Singapore, improve ties with China and India, lower shipping times, and eliminate pirate attacks in the Strait of Malacca, and support the Thai government's policy of being the logistical hub for Southeast Asia. The canal, it is claimed, would improve economic conditions in the south of Thailand, which relies heavily on tourism income, and it would also change the structure of the Thai economy by making it an Asia logistical hub. The canal would be a major engineering project and has an expected cost of US$20–30 billion. Climate Most of Thailand has a "tropical wet and dry or savanna climate" type (Köppen's Tropical savanna climate).[86] The south and the eastern tip of the east have a tropical monsoon climate. Countrywide, temperatures normally range from an average annual high of 38 °C (100.4 °F) to a low of 19 °C (66.2 °F). During the dry season, the temperature rises dramatically in the second half of March, spiking to well over 40 °C (104 °F) in some areas by mid-April when the sun passes its zenith. Southwest monsoons that arrive between May and July (except in the south) signal the advent of the rainy season (ruedu fon). This lasts into October and the cloud covering reduces the temperature again, with the high humidity experienced as 'hot and sticky'. November and December mark the onset of the dry season and night temperatures on high ground can occasionally drop to a light frost. Temperatures begin to climb again in January. Wildlife Main article: List of species native to Thailand The population of Asian elephants in Thailand's wild has dropped to an estimated 2,000–3,000.[87] The elephant is Thailand's national symbol. Although there were 100,000 domesticated elephants in Thailand in 1850, the population of elephants has dropped to an estimated 2,000.[87] Poachers have long hunted elephants for ivory, meat[citation needed], and hides. Young elephants are often captured for use in tourist attractions or as work animals, although their use has declined since the government banned logging in 1989. There are now more elephants in captivity than in the wild, and environmental activists claim that elephants in captivity are often mistreated.[88] Poaching of protected species remains a major problem. Hunters have decimated the populations of tigers, leopards, and other large cats for their valuable pelts. Many animals (including tigers, bears, crocodiles, and king cobras) are farmed or hunted for their meat, which is considered a delicacy, and for their supposed medicinal properties. Although such trade is illegal, the famous Bangkok market Chatuchak is still known for the sale of endangered species.[89] The practice of keeping wild animals as pets threatens several species. Baby animals are typically captured and sold, which often requires killing the mother. Once in captivity and out of their natural habitat, many pets die or fail to reproduce. Affected populations include the Asiatic black bear, Malayan sun bear, white-handed lar, pileated gibbon and binturong.[90] Education Main article: Education in Thailand Primary school students in Thailand In 2014 the literacy rate was 93.5%.[91] Education is provided by a well-organized school system of kindergartens, primary, lower secondary and upper secondary schools, numerous vocational colleges, and universities. The private sector of education is well developed and significantly contributes to the overall provision of education which the government would not be able to meet with public establishments. Education is compulsory up to and including age 14, with the government providing free education through to age 17.[citation needed] Chulalongkorn University, established in 1917, is the oldest university in Thailand. Teaching relies heavily on rote learning rather than on student-centred methodology. The establishment of reliable and coherent curricula for its primary and secondary schools is subject to such rapid changes that schools and their teachers are not always sure what they are supposed to be teaching, and authors and publishers of textbooks are unable to write and print new editions quickly enough to keep up with the volatility. Issues concerning university entrance has been in constant upheaval for a number of years. Nevertheless, Thai education has seen its greatest progress in the years since 2001. Most of the present generation of students are computer literate. Thailand was ranked 54th out of 56 countries globally for English proficiency, the second-lowest in Asia.[92] Students in ethnic minority areas score consistently lower in standardised national and international tests.[93] [94] [95] This is likely due to unequal allocation of educational resources, weak teacher training, poverty, and low Thai language skill, the language of the tests.[93] [96] [97] Extensive nationwide IQ tests were administered to 72,780 Thai students from December 2010 to January 2011. The average IQ was found to be 98.59, which is higher than previous studies have found. IQ levels were found to be inconsistent throughout the country, with the lowest average of 88.07 found in the southern region of Narathiwat Province and the highest average of 108.91 reported in Nonthaburi Province. The Ministry of Public Health blames the discrepancies on iodine deficiency and steps are being taken to require that iodine be added to table salt, a practice common in many Western countries.[98] In 2013, the Ministry of Information and Communication Technology announced that 27,231 schools would receive classroom-level access to high-speed internet.[dead link][99] Science and technology Main article: List of Thai inventions and discoveries The National Science and Technology Development Agency is an agency of the government of Thailand which supports research in science and technology and its application in the Thai economy.[citation needed] The Synchrotron Light Research Institute (SLRI) is a Thai synchrotron light source for physics, chemistry, material science, and life sciences. It is at the Suranaree University of Technology (SUT), in Nakhon Ratchasima, about 300 km northeast of Bangkok. The institute, financed by the Ministry of Science and Technology (MOST), houses the only large scale synchrotron in Southeast Asia. It was originally built as the SORTEC synchrotron in Japan and later moved to Thailand and modified for 1.2 GeV operation. It provides users with regularly scheduled light.[citation needed] Internet In Bangkok, there are 23,000 free public Wi-Fi Internet hotspots.[100] The Internet in Thailand includes 10Gbit/s high speed fibre-optic lines that can be leased and ISPs such as KIRZ that provide residential Internet services.[citation needed] The Internet is censored by the Thai government, making some sites unreachable.[101] The organisations responsible are the Royal Thai Police, the Communications Authority of Thailand, and the Ministry of Information and Communication Technology (MICT).[citation needed] Economy Main article: Economy of Thailand The BTS Skytrain passes through Sathon, the business district of Bangkok, the capital of Thailand and the country's largest commercial and financial centre. Thailand is an emerging economy and is considered a newly industrialised country. Thailand had a 2013 GDP of US$673 billion (on a purchasing power parity [PPP] basis).[102] Thailand is the 2nd largest economy in Southeast Asia after Indonesia. Thailand ranks midway in the wealth spread in Southeast Asia as it is the 4th richest nation according to GDP per capita, after Singapore, Brunei, and Malaysia. Thailand functions as an anchor economy for the neighbouring developing economies of Laos, Myanmar, and Cambodia. In the third quarter of 2014, the unemployment rate in Thailand stood at 0.84% according to Thailand's National Economic and Social Development Board (NESDB).[103] Automotive production in Thailand, 2004–2013. Recent economic history Thailand experienced the world's highest economic growth rate from 1985 to 1996 – averaging 12.4% annually. In 1997 increased pressure on the baht, a year in which the economy contracted by 1.9%, led to a crisis that uncovered financial sector weaknesses and forced the Chavalit Yongchaiyudh administration to float the currency. Prime Minister Chavalit Yongchaiyudh was forced to resign after his cabinet came under fire for its slow response to the economic crisis. The baht was pegged at 25 to the US dollar from 1978 to 1997. The baht reached its lowest point of 56 to the US dollar in January 1998 and the economy contracted by 10.8% that year, triggering the Asian financial crisis. Thailand's economy started to recover in 1999, expanding 4.2–4.4% in 2000, thanks largely to strong exports. Growth (2.2%) was dampened by the softening of the global economy in 2001, but picked up in the subsequent years owing to strong growth in Asia, a relatively weak baht encouraging exports, and increased domestic spending as a result of several mega projects and incentives of Prime Minister Thaksin Shinawatra, known as Thaksinomics. Growth in 2002, 2003, and 2004 was 5–7% annually. Growth in 2005, 2006, and 2007 hovered around 4–5%. Due both to the weakening of the US dollar and an increasingly strong Thai currency, by March 2008 the dollar was hovering around the 33 baht mark. While Thaksinomics has received criticism, official economic data reveals that between 2001 and 2011, Isan's GDP per capita more than doubled to US$1,475, while, over the same period, GDP in the Bangkok area increased from US$7,900 to nearly US$13,000.[104] With the instability surrounding major 2010 protests, the GDP growth of Thailand settled at around 4–5%, from highs of 5–7% under the previous civilian administration. Political uncertainty was identified as the primary cause of a decline in investor and consumer confidence. The IMF predicted that the Thai economy would rebound strongly from the low 0.1% GDP growth in 2011, to 5.5% in 2012 and then 7.5% in 2013, due to the monetary policy of the Bank of Thailand, as well as a package of fiscal stimulus measures introduced by the incumbent Yingluck Shinawatra government.[105] Following the Thai military coup of 22 May 2014, the AFP global news agency published an article that claimed that the nation was on the verge of recession. The article focused on the departure of nearly 180,000 Cambodians from Thailand due to fears of an immigration clampdown, but concluded with information on the Thai economy's contraction of 2.1% quarter-on-quarter, from January to the end of March 2014.[106] Exports and manufacturing A proportional representation of Thailand's exports. The economy of Thailand is heavily export-dependent, with exports accounting for more than two-thirds of gross domestic product (GDP). Thailand exports over US$105 billion worth of goods and services annually.[1] Major exports include rice, textiles and footwear, fishery products, rubber, jewellery, cars, computers, and electrical appliances.[1] Substantial industries include electric appliances, components, computer components, and vehicles. Thailand's recovery from the 1997–1998 Asian financial crisis depended mainly on exports, among various other factors. As of 2012[update], the Thai automotive industry was the largest in Southeast Asia and the 9th largest in the world.[107][108][109] The Thailand industry has an annual output of near 1.5 million vehicles, mostly commercial vehicles.[109] Most of the vehicles built in Thailand are developed and licensed by foreign producers, mainly Japanese and South Korean. The Thai car industry takes advantage of the ASEAN Free Trade Area (AFTA) to find a market for many of its products. Eight manufacturers, five Japanese, two US, and Tata of India, produce pick-up trucks in Thailand.[110] Thailand is the second largest consumer of pick-up trucks in the world, after the US.[citation needed] In 2014, pick-ups accounted for 42% of all new vehicle sales in Thailand.[110] Tourism Statue of a mythical Kinnon, Wat Phra Kaew, Bangkok Further information: Tourism in Thailand Tourism makes up about 6% of the economy. Thailand was the most visited country in Southeast Asia in 2013, according to the World Tourism Organisation. Estimates of tourism receipts directly contributing to the Thai GDP of 12 trillion baht range from 9 percent (1 trillion baht) (2013) to 16 percent.[111] When including the indirect effects of tourism, it is said to account for 20.2 percent (2.4 trillion baht) of Thailand's GDP.[112]:1 The Tourism Authority of Thailand (TAT) uses the slogan "Amazing Thailand" to promote Thailand internationally. In 2015, this was supplemented by a "Discover Thainess" campaign.[113] Asian tourists primarily visit Thailand for Bangkok and the historical, natural, and cultural sights in its vicinity. Western tourists not only visit Bangkok and surroundings, but in addition many travel to the southern beaches and islands. The north is the chief destination for trekking and adventure travel with its diverse ethnic minority groups and forested mountains. The region hosting the fewest tourists is Isan in the northeast. To accommodate foreign visitors, the Thai government established a separate tourism police with offices in the major tourist areas and its own central emergency telephone number.[114] "Amazing Thailand" – Thailand Tourism booth at a Travel and Tour Expo Thailand's attractions include diving sites, sandy beaches, hundreds of tropical islands, nightlife, archaeological sites, museums, hill tribes, flora and bird life, palaces, Buddhist temples and several World Heritage sites. Many tourists follow courses during their stay in Thailand. Popular are classes in Thai cooking, Buddhism and traditional Thai massage. Thai national festivals range from Thai New Year Songkran to Loy Krathong. Many localities in Thailand also have their own festivals. Among the best-known are the "Elephant Round-up" in Surin, the "Rocket Festival" in Yasothon and the "Phi Ta Khon" festival in Dan Sai. Thai cuisine has become famous worldwide with its enthusiastic use of fresh herbs and spices. Bangkok shopping malls offer a variety of international and local brands. Towards the north of the city, and easily reached by skytrain or underground, is the "Chatuchak Weekend Market". It is possibly the largest market in the world, selling everything from household items to live, and sometimes endangered,[115] animals. The "Pratunam Market" specialises in fabrics and clothing. The night markets in the Silom area and on Khaosan Road are mainly tourist-oriented, selling items such as T-shirts, handicrafts, counterfeit watches and sunglasses. In the vicinity of Bangkok one can find several floating markets such as the one in Damnoen Saduak. The "Sunday Evening Walking Street Market", held on Rachadamnoen Road inside the old city, is a shopping highlight of a visit to Chiang Mai up in northern Thailand. It attracts many locals as well as foreigners. The "Night Bazaar" is Chiang Mai's more tourist-oriented market, sprawling over several city blocks just east of the old city walls towards the river. Prostitution in Thailand and sex tourism also form a de facto part of the economy. Cultural milieu combined with poverty and the lure of money have caused prostitution and sex tourism in particular to flourish in Thailand. One estimate published in 2003 placed the trade at US$4.3 billion per year or about 3% of the Thai economy.[116] According to research by Chulalongkorn University on the Thai illegal economy, prostitution in Thailand in the period between 1993 and 1995, made up around 2.7% of the GDP.[117] It is believed that at least 10% of tourist dollars are spent on the sex trade.[118] Agriculture Further information: Agriculture in Thailand Thailand had long been the largest rice exporter in the world. Forty-nine percent of Thailand's labour force is employed in agriculture.[119] Forty-nine per cent of Thailand's labour force is employed in agriculture.[119] This is down from 70% in 1980.[119] Rice is the most important crop in the country and Thailand had long been the world's leading exporter of rice, until recently falling behind both India and Vietnam.[120] Thailand has the highest percentage of arable land, 27.25%, of any nation in the Greater Mekong Subregion.[121] About 55% of the arable land area is used for rice production.[122] Agriculture has been experiencing a transition from labour-intensive and transitional methods to a more industrialised and competitive sector.[119] Between 1962 and 1983, the agricultural sector grew by 4.1% per year on average and continued to grow at 2.2% between 1983 and 2007.[119] The relative contribution of agriculture to GDP has declined while exports of goods and services have increased. Energy Further information: Energy in Thailand 75% of Thailand's electrical generation is powered by natural gas in 2014.[123] Coal-fired power plants produce an additional 20% of electricity, with the remainder coming from biomass, hydro, and biogas.[123] Thailand produces roughly one-third of the oil it consumes. It is the second largest importer of oil in SE Asia. Thailand is a large producer of natural gas, with reserves of at least 10 trillion cubic feet. After Indonesia, it is the largest coal producer in SE Asia, but must import additional coal to meet domestic demand. Transportation Main articles: Transport in Thailand and List of airports in Thailand Demographics Main article: Demographics of Thailand Thailand had a population of 66,720,153[124] as of 2013[update]. Thailand's population is largely rural, concentrated in the rice-growing areas of the central, northeastern, and northern regions. Thailand had an urban population of 45.7% as of 2010[update], concentrated mostly in and around the Bangkok Metropolitan Area. Thailand's government-sponsored family planning program resulted in a dramatic decline in population growth from 3.1% in 1960 to around 0.4% today. In 1970, an average of 5.7 people lived in a Thai household. At the time of the 2010 census, the average Thai household size was 3.2 people. Ethnic groups Further information: Ethnic groups in Thailand Ethnic Thais make up the majority of Thailand's population, 95.9% in 2010. This number includes Thai Chinese, a historically and economically important minority. The remaining 4.1% of the population are Burmese (2.0%), others 1.3%, and unspecified 0.9%.[1] Thailand is home to a large immigrant community of around 200,000 foreigners.[citation needed] Some 41,000 Britons alone live in Thailand.[125] Increasing numbers of migrants from neighbouring Myanmar, Laos, and Cambodia, as well as from Nepal and India, have pushed the total number of non-national residents to around 3.5 million as of 2009[update], up from an estimated 2 million in 2008, and about 1.3 million in the year 2000.[126] Population centres Further information: List of cities in Thailand   v t e Largest Municipalities in Thailand See template Rank Name Province Pop. Rank Name Province Pop. Bangkok Nonthaburi 1 Bangkok Krung Thep Maha Nakhon 5,658,953 (2005)[127] 11 Pattaya Chonburi 104,318 (2007)[128] Pak Kret Hat Yai 2 Nonthaburi Nonthaburi 260,555 (2011)[129] 12 Nakhon Sawan Nakhon Sawan 90,412 3 Pak Kret Nonthaburi 168,763 (2008)[130] 13 Ubon Ratchathani Ubon Ratchathani 84,509 4 Hat Yai Songkhla 157,682 (2008)[131] 14 Nakhon Pathom Nakhon Pathom 83,007 5 Nakhon Ratchasima Nakhon Ratchasima 135,357 (2013)[132] 15 Phitsanulok Phitsanulok 79,535 6 Chiang Mai Chiang Mai 141,361 (2011)[133] 16 Phuket Phuket 74,218 7 Udon Thani Udon Thani 141,953 (2010)[134] 17 Songkhla Songkhla 73,170 8 Surat Thani Surat Thani 127,496 (2008)[135] 18 Chiang Rai Chiang Rai 67,176 9 Khon Kaen Khon Kaen 113,754 19 Laem Chabang Chonburi 64,607 10 Nakhon Si Thammarat Nakhon Si Thammarat 109,353 20 Yala Yala 62,896 Language Main article: Languages of Thailand Population, Thailand Year Pop. ±% 1910 8,131,247 —     1919 9,207,355 +13.2% 1929 11,506,207 +25.0% 1937 14,464,105 +25.7% 1947 17,442,689 +20.6% 1960 26,257,916 +50.5% 1970 34,397,371 +31.0% 1980 44,824,540 +30.3% 1990 54,548,530 +21.7% 2000 60,916,441 +11.7% 2010 65,926,261 +8.2% Source: [1] National Statistical Office of Thailand The official language of Thailand is Thai, a Tai–Kadai language closely related to Lao, Shan in Myanmar, and numerous smaller languages spoken in an arc from Hainan and Yunnan south to the Chinese border. It is the principal language of education and government and spoken throughout the country. The standard is based on the dialect of the central Thai people, and it is written in the Thai alphabet, an abugida script that evolved from the Khmer alphabet. Several other dialects exist, and coincide with the regional designations. Southern Thai is spoken in the southern provinces, and Northern Thai is spoken in the provinces that were formerly part of the independent kingdom of Lan Na. Thailand is also host to several other minority languages, the largest of which is the Lao dialect of Isan spoken in the northeastern provinces. Although sometimes considered a Thai dialect, it is a Lao dialect, and the region in where it is traditionally spoken was historically part of the Lao kingdom of Lan Xang. In the far south, Kelantan-Pattani Malay is the primary language of Malay Muslims. Varieties of Chinese are also spoken by the large Thai Chinese population, with the Teochew dialect best-represented. Numerous tribal languages are also spoken, including many Austroasiatic languages such as Mon, Khmer, Viet, Mlabri and Orang Asli; Austronesian languages such as Cham and Moken; Sino-Tibetan languages like Lawa, Akha, and Karen; and other Tai languages such as Tai Yo, Phu Thai, and Saek. Hmong is a member of the Hmong–Mien languages, which is now regarded as a language family of its own. English is a mandatory school subject, but the number of fluent speakers remains low, especially outside cities. Religion Main article: Religion in Thailand Thailand's prevalent religion is Theravada Buddhism, which is an integral part of Thai identity and culture. Active participation in Buddhism is among the highest in the world. According to the 2000 census, 94.6% of the country's population self-identified as Buddhists of the Theravada tradition. Muslims constitute the second largest religious group in Thailand, comprising 4.6% of the population.[1][136] Islam is concentrated mostly in the country's southernmost provinces: Pattani, Yala, Satun, Narathiwat, and part of Songkhla Chumphon, which are predominantly Malay, most of whom are Sunni Muslims. Christians represent 0.7% of the population, with the remaining population consisting of Sikhs and Hindus, who live mostly in the country's cities. There is also a small but historically significant Jewish community in Thailand dating back to the 17th century. Culture Main article: Culture of Thailand See also: Music of Thailand, Isan, and Cinema of Thailand Theravada Buddhism, highly practised in Thailand. Thai culture has been shaped by many influences, including Indian, Lao, Burmese, Cambodian, and Chinese. Its traditions incorporate a great deal of influence from India, China, Cambodia, and the rest of Southeast Asia. Thailand's national religion, Theravada Buddhism, is central to modern Thai identity. Thai Buddhism has evolved over time to include many regional beliefs originating from Hinduism, animism, as well as ancestor worship. The official calendar in Thailand is based on the Eastern version of the Buddhist Era (BE), which is 543 years ahead of the Gregorian (Western) calendar. Thus the year 2015 is 2558 BE in Thailand. Several different ethnic groups, many of which are marginalised, populate Thailand. Some of these groups spill over into Myanmar, Laos, Cambodia and Malaysia and have mediated change between their traditional local culture, national Thai, and global cultural influences. Overseas Chinese also form a significant part of Thai society, particularly in and around Bangkok. Their successful integration into Thai society has allowed for this group to hold positions of economic and political power. Thai Chinese businesses prosper as part of the larger bamboo network, a network of overseas Chinese businesses operating in the markets of Southeast Asia that share common family and cultural ties.[137] Khon Show is the most stylised form of Thai performance. The traditional Thai greeting, the wai, is generally offered first by the younger of the two people meeting, with their hands pressed together, fingertips pointing upwards as the head is bowed to touch face to fingertips, usually coinciding with the spoken words "sawatdi khrap" for male speakers, and "sawatdi kha" for females. The elder may then respond in the same way. Social status and position, such as in government, will also have an influence on who performs the wai first. For example, although one may be considerably older than a provincial governor, when meeting it is usually the visitor who pays respect first. When children leave to go to school, they are taught to wai their parents to indicate their respect. The wai is a sign of respect and reverence for another, similar to the namaste greeting of India and Nepal. As with other Asian cultures, respect towards ancestors is an essential part of Thai spiritual practice. Thais have a strong sense of hospitality and generosity, but also a strong sense of social hierarchy. Seniority is paramount in Thai culture. Elders have by tradition ruled in family decisions or ceremonies. Older siblings have duties to younger ones. Taboos in Thailand include touching someone's head or pointing with the feet, as the head is considered the most sacred and the foot the lowest part of the body. Cuisine Further information: Cuisine of Thailand Thai cuisine blends five fundamental tastes: sweet, spicy, sour, bitter, and salty. Some common ingredients used in Thai cuisine include garlic, chillies, lime juice, lemon grass, coriander, galangal, palm sugar, and fish sauce (nam pla). The staple food in Thailand is rice, particularly jasmine variety rice (also known as "hom Mali" rice) which is included at almost every meal. Thailand was long the world's largest exporter of rice, and Thais domestically consume over 100 kg of milled rice per person per year.[122] Over 5,000 varieties of rice from Thailand are preserved in the rice gene bank of the International Rice Research Institute (IRRI), based in the Philippines. The king of Thailand is the official patron of IRRI.[138] Media Further information: Media of Thailand Thai society has been influenced in recent years by its widely available multi-language press and media. There are some English and numerous Thai and Chinese newspapers in circulation. Most Thai popular magazines use English headlines as a chic glamour factor. Many large businesses in Bangkok operate in English as well as other languages. Thailand is the largest newspaper market in Southeast Asia with an estimated circulation of over 13 million copies daily in 2003. Even upcountry, out of Bangkok, the media flourish. For example, according to Thailand's Public Relations Department Media Directory 2003–2004, the nineteen provinces of Isan, Thailand's northeastern region, hosted 116 newspapers along with radio, TV, and cable. Since then, another province, Bueng Kan, was incorporated, totalling twenty provinces. In addition, a military coup on 22 May 2014 led to severe state restrictions on all media and forms of expression. Units of measurement Further information: Thai units of measurement Thailand generally uses the metric system, but traditional units of measurement for land area are used, and imperial units of measurement are occasionally used for building materials, such as wood and plumbing fixtures. Years are numbered as B.E. (Buddhist Era) in educational settings, the civil service, government, and on contracts and newspaper datelines. In banking, and increasingly in industry and commerce, standard Western year (Christian or Common Era) counting is the standard practice.[139] Sports See also: Thailand at the Olympics, Rugby union in Thailand, Golf in Thailand, and Football in Thailand Muay Thai, Thailand's signature sport Muay Thai (Thai: มวยไทย, RTGS: Muai Thai,  [muaj tʰaj], lit. "Thai boxing") is a native form of kickboxing and Thailand's signature sport. It incorporates kicks, punches, knees and elbow strikes in a ring with gloves similar to those used in Western boxing and this has led to Thailand gaining medals at the Olympic Games in boxing. Association football has overtaken muay Thai as the most widely followed sport in contemporary Thai society. Thailand national football team has played the AFC Asian Cup six times and reached the semifinals in 1972. The country has hosted the Asian Cup twice, in 1972 and in 2007. The 2007 edition was co-hosted together with Indonesia, Malaysia and Vietnam. It is not uncommon to see Thais cheering their favourite English Premier League teams on television and walking around in replica kit. Another widely enjoyed pastime, and once a competitive sport, is kite flying. Rajamangala National Stadium Volleyball is rapidly growing as one of the most popular sport. The Women team has often participated World Championship,World Cup,and World Grand Prix Asian Championship. They also won Asian Championship twice and Asian Cup once. By the success of the women team, the men team has been growing as well. Takraw (Thai: ตะกร้อ) is a sport native to Thailand, in which the players hit a rattan ball and are only allowed to use their feet, knees, chest, and head to touch the ball. Sepak takraw is a form of this sport which is similar to volleyball. The players must volley a ball over a net and force it to hit the ground on the opponent's side. It is also a popular sport in other countries in Southeast Asia. A rather similar game but played only with the feet is Buka ball. Snooker has enjoyed increasing popularity in Thailand in recent years, with interest in the game being stimulated by the success of Thai snooker player James Wattana in the 1990s.[140] Other notable players produced by the country include Ratchayothin Yotharuck, Noppon Saengkham and Dechawat Poomjaeng.[141] Rugby is also a growing sport in Thailand with the Thailand national rugby union team rising to be ranked 61st in the world.[142] Thailand became the first country in the world to host an international 80 kg welterweight rugby tournament in 2005.[143] The national domestic Thailand Rugby Union (TRU) competition includes several universities and services teams such as Chulalongkorn University, Mahasarakham University, Kasetsart University, Prince of Songkla University, Thammasat University, Rangsit University, the Thai Police, the Thai Army, the Thai Navy and the Royal Thai Air Force. Local sports clubs which also compete in the TRU include the British Club of Bangkok, the Southerners Sports Club (Bangkok) and the Royal Bangkok Sports Club. Thailand has been called the golf capital of Asia[144] as it is a popular destination for golf. The country attracts a large number of golfers from Japan, Korea, Singapore, South Africa, and Western countries who come to play golf in Thailand every year.[145] The growing popularity of golf, especially among the middle classes and immigrants, is evident as there are more than 200 world-class golf courses nationwide,[146] and some of them are chosen to host PGA and LPGA tournaments, such as Amata Spring Country Club, Alpine Golf and Sports Club, Thai Country Club, and Black Mountain Golf Club. Basketball is a growing sport in Thailand, especially on the professional sports club level. The Chang Thailand Slammers won the 2011 ASEAN Basketball League Championship.[147] The Thailand national basketball team had its most successful year at the 1966 Asian Games where it won the silver medal.[148] Other sports in Thailand are slowly growing as the country develops its sporting infrastructure. The success in sports like weightlifting and taekwondo at the last two summer Olympic Games has demonstrated that boxing is no longer the only medal option for Thailand. Sporting venues Thammasat Stadium is a multi-purpose stadium in Bangkok. It is currently used mostly for football matches. The stadium holds 25,000. It is on Thammasat University's Rangsit campus. It was built for the 1998 Asian Games by construction firm Christiani and Nielsen, the same company that constructed the Democracy Monument in Bangkok. Rajamangala National Stadium is the biggest sporting arena in Thailand. It currently has a capacity of 65,000. It is in Bang Kapi, Bangkok. The stadium was built in 1998 for the 1998 Asian Games and is the home stadium of the Thailand national football team. The well-known Lumpini Boxing Stadium will host its final Muay Thai boxing matches on 7 February 2014 after the venue first opened in December 1956. Managed by the Royal Thai Army, the stadium was officially selected for the purpose of muay Thai bouts following a competition that was staged on 15 March 1956. From 11 February 2014, the stadium will relocate to Ram Intra Road, due to the new venue's capacity to accommodate audiences of up to 3,500. Foreigners typically pay between 1,000–2,000 baht to view a match, with prices depending on the location of the seating.[149] International rankings Main article: International rankings of Thailand Organisation Survey Ranking Heritage Foundation Indices of Economic Freedom 60 of 179 A.T. Kearney/Foreign Policy Magazine Global Services Location Index 2011 7 of 50 Reporters Without Borders Worldwide Press Freedom Index, 2014 130 of 180 Transparency International Corruption Perceptions Index 80 of 179 United Nations Development Programme Human Development Index 89 of 187 World Economic Forum Global Competitiveness Report (2008) 34 of 134[150] World Gold Council Gold reserve (2010) 24 of 111 HSBC International Expat Explorer Survey (2012) 2 of 30[151] See also Thailand portal Asia portal Geography portal Southeast Asia portal Book: Thailand Outline of Thailand Index of Thailand-related articles Royal Thai Police Law of Thailand Telecommunications in Thailand Thai ceramics Thai temple art and architecture Transport in Thailand Corruption in Thailand References ^ a b c d e f Thailand, The World Factbook. ^ a b McCargo, D.; Hongladarom, K. (2004). "Contesting Isan‐ness: Discourses of politics and identity in Northeast Thailand" (PDF). Asian Ethnicity 5 (2): 219. doi:10.1080/1463136042000221898.  ^ David Levinson (1998), Ethnic Groups Worldwide: A Ready Reference Handbook, Oryx Pres, p. 287, ISBN 1573560197  ^ Paul, Lewis M.; Simons, Gary F.; Fennig, Charles D. (2013), Ethnologue: Languages of the World, SIL International, ISBN 978-1-55671-216-6  ^ a b Barbara A. West (2009), Encyclopedia of the Peoples of Asia and Oceania, Facts on File, p. 794, ISBN 1438119135  ^ "Thailand's new provisional constitution". Thai PBS. 22 July 2014. Retrieved 14 December 2014.  ^ "World Population Prospects: The 2015 Revision, Key Findings and Advance Tables" (PDF). United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs/Population Division. p. 17. Retrieved 10 January 2016.  ^ (Thai) National Statistics Office, "100th anniversary of population censuses in Thailand: Population and housing census 2010: 11th census of Thailand". popcensus.nso.go.th. ^ a b c d "Thailand". International Monetary Fund. Retrieved 16 April 2016.  ^ "Gini Index". World Bank. Retrieved 2 June 2015.  ^ a b "2015 Human Development Report" (PDF). United Nations Development Programme. 2015. Retrieved 15 December 2015.  ^ "Merriam-Webster Online". Merriam-webster.com. 25 April 2007. Retrieved 25 April 2010.  ^ "Thailand's Junta Chief Chosen as Prime Minister". Thailand News.Net. 21 August 2014. Retrieved 21 August 2014.  ^ "A Royal Occasion speeches". Worldhop.com Journal. 1996. Retrieved 5 July 2006.  ^ Theraphan Luangthongkum (2007). "The Position of Non-Thai Languages in Thailand". Language, Nation and Development in Southeast Asia (ISEAS Publishing): 191.  ^ Thailand and the World Bank, World Bank on Thailand country overview. ^ The Guardian, Country profile: Thailand, 25 April 2009. ^ Jonathan H. Ping Middle Power Statecraft (p 104) ^ Charles Eliot (1921). The Project Gutenberg EBook of Hinduism and Buddhism, An Historical Sketch, Vol. 3 (of 3) [EBook #16847]. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul Ltd. pp. Ch. xxxvii 1; citing in turn Footnote 189: The name is found on Champan inscriptions of 1050 CE and according to Gerini appears in Ptolemy's Samarade = Sâmaraṭṭha. See Gerini, Ptolemy, p. 170. But Samarade is near Bangkok and there can hardly have been Thais there in Ptolemy's time; and Footnote 190: So too in Central Asia Kustana appears to be a learned distortion of the name Khotan, made to give it a meaning in Sanskrit.  ^ Thailand (Siam) History, CSMngt-Thai. Archived 24 April 2015 at the Wayback Machine. ^ Cœdès 1968, p. 197. ^ จิตร ภูมิศักดิ์ 1976: "ความเป็นมาของคำสยาม ไทย ลาวและขอม และลักษณะทางสังคม ของชื่อชนชาติ" (Jid Phumisak 1976: "Coming Into Existence for the Siamese Words for Thai, Laotian and Khmer and Societal Characteristics for Nation-names") ^ Thailand. History. Encyclopædia Britannica ^ a b c Some Aspects of Asian History and Culture by Upendra Thakur p.157 ^ Cœdès 1968, pp. 190-191,194-195. ^ "Science news: What happened at Angkor Wat". The Washington Post. 13 April 2010. ^ Slave-owning societies. Encyclopædia Britannica. ^ Slavery in Nineteenth-Century Northern Thailand. Kyoto Review of South East Asia. ^ "King, country and the coup". The Indian Express (Mumbai). 22 September 2006. Retrieved 3 November 2011.  ^ a b Werner Gruhl, Imperial Japan's World War Two, 1931–1945, Transaction Publishers, 2007 ISBN 978-0-7658-0352-8 ^ http://asiapacific.anu.edu.au/newmandala/2014/05/17/thailands-juristocracy/ ^ Bangkok Post: Section 44 is necessary: NCPO. This list contains 2 errors: it states that the 6th constitution was promulgated in 1912 (rather than 1952), and it states that the 11th constitution was promulgated in 1976 (rather than 1974). ^ Thanet Aphornsuvan, The Search for Order: Constitutions and Human Rights in Thai Political History PDF (152 KB), 2001 Symposium: Constitutions and Human Rights in a Global Age: An Asia Pacific perspective ^ "A list of previous coups in Thailand". Associated Press. 19 September 2006. Archived from the original on 24 February 2009. Retrieved 25 April 2010.  ^ "Raw Data: List of Recent Coups in Thailand's History". Fox News Channel. 19 September 2006. Archived from the original on 6 July 2008. Retrieved 25 April 2010.  ^ Kittipong Kittayarak, The Thai Constitution of 1997 and its Implication on Criminal Justice Reform PDF (221 KB) ^ Robert B. Albritton and Thawilwadee Bureekul, Developing Democracy under a New Constitution in Thailand PDF (319 KB), National Taiwan University and Academia Sinica Asian Barometer Project Office Working Paper Series No. 28, 2004 ^ Pongsudhirak Thitinan, "Victory places Thaksin at crossroads", Bangkok Post, 9 February 2005 ^ "Unprecedented 72% turnout for latest poll". The Nation. 10 February 2005.  ^ Aurel Croissant and Daniel J. Pojar, Jr., Quo Vadis Thailand? Thai Politics after the 2005 Parliamentary Election, Strategic Insights, Volume IV, Issue 6 (Jun 2005) Archived 12 October 2013 at the Wayback Machine. ^ The Nation, NLA 'doesn't represent' all of the people, 14 October 2006 ^ The Nation, Assembly will not play a major role, 14 October 2006 ^ The Nation, Interim charter draft, 27 September 2006 ^ "Ban on political activities lifted". The Nation. 18 July 2007.  ^ Ahuja, Ambika (10 September 2008). "Thai Premier Ousted Over Stints on Cooking Show". The Washington Post. Retrieved 25 April 2010.  ^ Thailändisches Verfassungsgericht verbietet Regierungspartei. Der Spiegel, 2 December 2008 ^ Peter Beaumont (11 April 2009). "Protesters storm Asian leaders' summit in Thailand". The Guardian. Retrieved 22 February 2014.  ^ Joel Rathus (4 November 2009). "Squaring the Japanese and Australia proposals for an East Asian and Asia Pacific Community: is America in or out?". East Asia Forum. East Asian Bureau of Economic Research. Retrieved 22 February 2014.  ^ "PM vows to seek truth". Bangkok Post. 22 May 2010. Retrieved 22 May 2010. [dead link] ^ BBC News, Bangkok clashes death toll climbs to 18, with 800 hurt, 11 April 2010 ^ Aj Jazeera English, Bloodiest Thai clashes in 18 years, 11 April 2010 ^ Australia 'very concerned' over Thailand clashes, NST Online Australia, 11 April 2010 ^ Military admits firing at reds, Bangkok Post, 15 April 2010 ^ http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-asia-pacific-13294268 ^ "Thailand confirms Yingluck Shinawatra as first female PM". The Guardian. 5 August 2011. Retrieved 15 December 2013.  ^ Kevin Hewison (3 December 2013). "Thailand’s street politics turns violent yet again". The Conversation Australia. Retrieved 15 December 2013.  ^ "Thai prime minister dissolves parliament". Al Jazeera. 9 December 2013. Retrieved 15 December 2013.  ^ "Thai PM Urges Protesters to Take Part in Election". The New York Times. Reuters. 10 December 2013. Retrieved 15 December 2013.  ^ Khoonton, Thanarak (22 December 2013). "Suthep: Protesters to block EC registration". Bangkok Post. Retrieved 23 December 2013.  ^ Hodal, Kate. "Thai court orders Yingluck Shinawatra to step down as PM". The Guardian. Retrieved 7 May 2014.  ^ "Coup leader General Prayuth is Thailand's new PM". Southeast Asia Post. 21 August 2014. Retrieved 22 August 2014.  ^ "Thailand's army declares martial law, denies coup". CBC News. Retrieved 20 May 2014.  ^ "Thailand army chief announces military coup". The Guardian. Retrieved 22 May 2014.  ^ Thailand military seizes power in coup, BBC, 22 May 2014, retrieved 22 May 2014  ^ http://www.cbc.ca/news/world/thailand-s-army-takes-control-of-government-announces-nationwide-curfew-1.2650454 ^ http://www.bangkokpost.com/most-recent/411230/10pm-5am-curfew-enforced ^ http://www.telegraph.co.uk/travel/destinations/asia/thailand/10849092/Thailand-coup-tourists-must-abide-by-curfew.html ^ http://www.ctvnews.ca/world/coup-declared-in-thailand-curfew-imposed-1.1832758 ^ http://edition.cnn.com/2014/05/21/travel/thailand-tourism-martial-law/ ^ "Thai military government replaces martial law". BBC. Retrieved 12 November 2015.  ^ Gray, Denis D. (2015-08-2015). "Deadly bombing in military-ruled Thailand adds to mounting woes in one-time 'Land of Smiles'". U.S. News & World Report. Associated Press. Retrieved 23 August 2015.  Check date values in: |date= (help) ^ a b "Election panel expects 80% turnout for referendum". 28 March 2016. Through its self-drafted law, the EC has effectively banned debates on the draft anywhere else apart from the forums it will host.  ^ "Twentieth Time Lucky?". The Economist (Print). 20 February 2016. Retrieved 26 March 2016.  ^ http://www.bangkokpost.com/news/politics/918657/attitude-camps-ready-for-guests ^ "FTA Watch Group website". Ftawatch.org. Retrieved 25 April 2010.  ^ John D. Ciorciari (10 March 2004). "Thaksin's Chance for Leading Role in the Region". The Straits Times. Singapore.  ^ 'Thaksin to face charges over Burma telecom deal. ICT News, 2 August 2007 ^ "Thailand sends troops to bolster US occupation of Iraq". World Socialist Web Site. Retrieved 28 January 2015.  ^ The Telegraph, Troops from Thailand and Cambodia fight on border, 3 April 2009 ^ Bloomberg, Thai, Cambodian Border Fighting Stops, Thailand Says, 3 April 2009 ^ "Thailand Military Strength". Global Firepower. Retrieved 15 December 2014.  ^ Chapter 2 of the 2007 Constitution of Thailand ^ John Pike (27 April 2005). "Ministry of Defense". GlobalSecurity.org. Retrieved 25 April 2010.  ^ SIPRI Military Expenditure Database – Thailand. SIPRI, 2012. Retrieved 3 May 2012. ^ Chapter 4 of the 2007 Constitution of Thailand ^ Dr. Susan L. Woodward (1997–2014). "Tropical Savannas". Biomes of the World. S. L. Woodward. Retrieved 23 February 2014.  ^ a b "Thailand's Elephants". Thai Elephant Conservation Center. Retrieved 3 March 2015.  ^ Jennifer Hile (6 October 2002). "Activists Denounce Thailand's Elephant "Crushing" Ritual". National Geographic Today. Retrieved 7 June 2007.  ^ Teena Amrit Gill (18 February 1997). "Endangered Animals on Restaurant Menus". Albion Monitor/News. Retrieved 7 June 2007.  ^ "Thai Forests: Dept. National Parks, Wildlife & Plants". Thai Society for the Conservation of Wild Animals.  ^ BTI 2014 | Thailand country Report ^ Thai university applicants scored an average 28.34% in English in recent university entrance exams.[citation needed] In a recent IMD World Competitiveness Report, Thailand was ranked 54th out of 56 countries globally for English proficiency, the second-lowest in Asia. Singapore was third, Malaysia 28th, and Korea 46th: The Sorry State of Thai Education – Part 4: Dismal English-language education, Reuters & The Korea Herald, 23 March 2012. ^ a b Draper, John (2012), "Revisiting English in Thailand", Asian EFL Journal (Asian EFL Journal) 14 (4): 9–38, ISSN 1738-1460  ^ OECD (2013), Structural Policy Country Notes: Thailand (PDF), OECD  ^ Khaopa, Wannapa (12 December 2012). "Thai students drop in world maths and science study". The Nation.  ^ Draper, John (12 December 2011). "Solving Isaan's education problem". The Isaan Record.  ^ Draper, John (21 February 2014). "PISA Thailand regional breakdown shows inequalities between Bangkok and Upper North with the rest of Thailand". The Isaan Record.  ^ "MOPH reports low IQ among Thai youth : National News Bureau of Thailand". Thainews.prd.go.th. 8 July 2011. Archived from the original on 8 July 2011. Retrieved 3 November 2011.  ^ "Thailand Provides 27,231 Schools With Internet". 11 March 2013. Retrieved 30 January 2015.  ^ Bangkok's free internet: 23,000 hotspots | Bangkok Post: learning. Bangkok Post (2 May 2012). Retrieved 16 April 2013. ^ "Thailand’s Massive Internet Censorship", Asian Correspondent.com, Hybrid News Limited, 22 July 2010 ^ "GDP (Purchasing Power Parity)". The World Factbook. US CIA. Retrieved 4 January 2015.  ^ "NESDB: Thailand facing unemployment problem". Pattaya Mail. 25 November 2014. Retrieved 4 January 2015.  ^ Aidan Jones (31 January 2014). "Thai northeast vows poll payback to Shinawatra clan". Agence France-Presse. Retrieved 8 February 2014.  ^ Phisanu Phromchanya (24 February 2012). "Thailand Economy To Rebound Strongly In 2012,". The Wall Street Journal. Retrieved 26 April 2012.  ^ "Cambodian exodus from Thailand jumps to nearly 180,000". Agence France-Presse. 17 June 2014. Retrieved 17 June 2014.  ^ Santivimolnat, Santan (18 August 2012). "2-million milestone edges nearer". Bangkok Post (The Post Publishing).  ^ Languepin, Olivier (3 January 2013). "Thailand poised to Surpass Car Production target". Thailand Business News. Archived from the original on 15 January 2013. Retrieved 20 January 2013.  ^ a b "Production Statistics". OICA (International Organization of Motor Vehicle Manufacturers). Archived from the original on 6 November 2013. Retrieved 26 November 2012.  ^ a b Takahashi, Toru (27 November 2014). "Thailand's love affair with the pickup truck". Nikkei Asian Review. Retrieved 4 January 2015.  ^ "Government moves to head off tourist fears". Bangkok Post. 2015-08-24. Retrieved 24 August 2015.  ^ Travel and Tourism, Economic Impact 2014: Thailand (PDF) (2014 ed.). London: World Travel & Tourism Council. 2014. Retrieved 10 March 2015.  ^ "History". TATnews.org. Tourism Authority of Thailand (TAT). 2015. Retrieved 7 May 2015.  ^ Tourist Police in Thailand. Amazing-Thailand.com. Retrieved on 16 September 2010. ^ IUCN – Home. Cms.iucn.org (24 April 2008). Retrieved on 16 September 2010. ^ Thailand mulls legal prostitution. The Age, 26 November 2003 ^ Pasuk Phongpaichit Thailand's illegal economy and public policy. Seminar paper delivered at the Centre of Southeast Asian Studies, Kyoto University, Nov 1999 ^ Martin, Lorna. "Paradise Revealed". Taipei Times. Retrieved 29 January 2015.  ^ a b c d e Henri Leturque and Steve Wiggins 2010. Thailand's progress in agriculture: Transition and sustained productivity growth. London: Overseas Development Institute ^ International Grains Council. "Grain Market Report (GMR444)", London, 14 May 2014. Retrieved 13 June 2014. ^ "CIA World Factbook – Greater Mekong Subregion". Cia.gov. Retrieved 3 November 2011.  ^ a b "Rice Around The World. Thailand". Irri.org. Archived from the original on 27 March 2008. Retrieved 25 April 2010.  ^ a b "International Index of Energy Security Risk" (PDF). Institute for 21st Century Energy. Institute for 21st Century Energy. 2013. Retrieved 14 September 2014.  ^ ประกาศสานักทะเบียนกลาง กรมการปกครอง เรื่อง จานวนราษฎรทั่วราชอาณาจักร แยกเป็นกรุงเทพมหานครและจังหวัดต่าง ๆ ตามหลักฐานการทะเบียนราษฎร ณ วันที่ 31 ธันวาคม 2553. Web.archive.org (16 July 2011). Retrieved 20 May 2012. ^ McGeown, Kate (14 December 2006). "Hard lessons in expat paradise". BBC News. Retrieved 1 March 2015.  ^ Thailand: Burmese migrant children missing out on education. IRIN Asia. 15 June 2009. Archived 3 July 2015 at the Wayback Machine. ^ "Geography of Bangkok". Bangkok Metropolitan Administration. Retrieved 2007-09-08.  ^ "Pattaya population statistic according to residents registration 1997-2007 (Thai only)". Pattaya City Registrar Office. Retrieved 2007-11-29.  ^ ข้อมูลเทศบาลนครนนทบุรี. Nakornnont.com. Retrieved on 2011-12-14. ^ เทศบาลนครปากเกร็ด. Pakkretcity.go.th. Retrieved on 2011-12-14. ^ เทศบาลนครหาดใหญ่. www.Hatyaicity.go.th. Retrieved on 2011-12-14. ^ งานทะเบียนราษฎร. Koratcity.net. Retrieved on 2014-07-27. ^ สภาพทั่วไปของเทศบาลนครเชียงใหม่ (CHIANG MAI MUNICIPALITY). Cmcity.go.th. Retrieved on 2011-12-14. ^ บริบทเทศบาล. Udoncity.go.th (2010-03-02). Retrieved on 2011-12-14. ^ รายงานสถิติจำนวนประชากร และบ้าน รายจังหวัด รายอำเภอ และรายตำบลณ เดือน ธันวาคม พ.ศ. 2551. Dopa.go.th. Retrieved on 2011-12-14. ^ "US Department of State, Thailand". State.gov. Retrieved 25 April 2010.  ^ Murray L Weidenbaum (1 January 1996). The Bamboo Network: How Expatriate Chinese Entrepreneurs are Creating a New Economic Superpower in Asia. Martin Kessler Books, Free Press. pp. 4–8. ISBN 978-0-684-82289-1.  ^ Cooperation of IRRI and Thailand PDF (38.7 KB) Archived 30 June 2005 at the Wayback Machine. ^ "Weights and measures in Thailand". Cockatoo.com. 17 December 1923. Retrieved 25 April 2010.  ^ Hodgson, Guy (18 April 1993). "Snooker: A storm coming in from the East: Thailand doesn't boast many world-beating sportsmen. But over the next fortnight James Wattana might just become one". The Independent (London). Retrieved 25 January 2015.  ^ Goyder, James (11 January 2014). "South East Asians proving high earners on the tables". thenational.ae. Retrieved 25 January 2015.  ^ "International Rugby Board – THAILAND". International Rugby Board. Retrieved 25 April 2010.  ^ The Nation, 19 July 2005 ^ "Golf in Thailand by". Golfasia.com. Retrieved 25 April 2010.  ^ Chawadee Nualkhair (10 July 2009). "Thailand woos foreign golfers with sun, sand traps". Reuters. Retrieved 25 April 2010.  ^ "Why to book with golf2thailand.com : Thailand Golf Courses Thailand Golf Packages". Golf2thailand.com. Retrieved 25 April 2010.  ^ "Chang Thailand Slammers – AirAsia ASEAN Basketball League". aseanbasketballleague.com. Retrieved 2 June 2012.  ^ "Thailand Basketball". best-basketball-tips.com. Retrieved 2 June 2012.  ^ "End of an era for Muay Thai at Lumpini". Bangkok Post. 6 February 2014. Retrieved 6 February 2014.  ^ "Global Competitiveness Report 2008-2009" (PDF). World Economic Forum. weforum.org. 2008. Archived from the original (PDF) on 24 March 2009. Retrieved 12 September 2008.  ^ "Expat Explorer Survey 2012" (PDF). Expat. HSBC Group. Retrieved 24 October 2012.  Bibliography Cœdès, George (1968). Walter F. Vella, ed. The Indianized States of Southeast Asia. trans.Susan Brown Cowing. University of Hawaii Press. ISBN 978-0-8248-0368-1.  External links Find more about Thailand at Wikipedia's sister projects Definitions from Wiktionary Media from Commons News stories from Wikinews Quotations from Wikiquote Source texts from Wikisource Textbooks from Wikibooks Travel guide from Wikivoyage Learning resources from Wikiversity Wikimedia Commons has media related to Category:Thailand. Government Thaigov.go.th Government of Thailand Chief of State and Cabinet Members Mfa.go.th Ministry of Foreign Affairs Thailand Internet Information National Electronics and Computer Technology Center Ministry of Culture General information Thailand entry at The World Factbook Thailand entry in Library of Congress Country Studies. 1987 Thailand from UCB Libraries GovPubs Thailand at DMOZ Thailand from the BBC News Thailand Encyclopædia Britannica entry Wikimedia Atlas of Thailand Longdo Map On-line Thailand maps in English and Thai Key Development Forecasts for Thailand from International Futures 2010 Thailand population census by Economic and Social statistics Bureau Travel Thailand travel guide from Wikivoyage Tourism Authority of Thailand Official tourism website Other Thailand Country Fact Sheet from the Common Language Project[dead link] Southeast Asia Visions. "Browse the Southeast Asia Visions Collection". Cornell University Library. Retrieved 2 October 2011. Browse by image date * Flickr: Photos tagged with "Thailand"   Myanmar  Myanmar  Laos  Laos  Myanmar  Laos  Cambodia    Thailand   Andaman Sea  Malaysia Gulf of Thailand v t e Thailand articles History Prehistory Peopling Khun Borom Tai peoples Early history Initial states Sukhothai era Ayutthaya era Thonburi era Rattanakosin era Siamese Revolution Military period Democratic period Geography Cities and towns Climate Ecoregions Environmental issues Islands Mountains Protected areas Regions Rivers Volcanoes Wildlife World Heritage Sites Politics Constitution Monarchy (list) Elections Parliament Government Prime Minister (list) Cabinet Ministries Administrative divisions Foreign relations Human rights Judiciary Law Localism Military Police Political parties Economy Agriculture Banks central bank Baht (currency) Car industry Energy Stock Exchange Telecommunications Internet telephone numbers Tourism Transport Society Crime Demographics Education Ethnic groups Languages Health Religion Women LGBT Culture Architecture Art Birth Cinema Clothing Cuisine Dance Etiquette Folklore Literature Names Marriage Media television Music Thai people Prostitution Public holidays Sports Symbols anthem emblem flag Time lunar calendar solar calendar Video gaming Outline Index Book Category Portal WikiProject   Links to related articles   Geographic locale v t e Countries and other territories in Southeast Asia Sovereign states Brunei Cambodia East Timor Indonesia Laos Malaysia Myanmar Philippines Singapore Thailand Vietnam Dependent territories or Special Administrative Regions Christmas Island (Australia) Cocos (Keeling) Islands (Australia) Subdivisions Paracel Islands (controlled by China) Pratas Islands (controlled by Taiwan) Spratly Islands (disputed among and controlled by various claimants) Andaman and Nicobar Islands (India) Hainan (China) v t e Countries and territories bordering the Indian Ocean Africa Comoros Djibouti Egypt Eritrea France Mayotte Réunion Kenya Madagascar Mauritius Mozambique Rodrigues (Mauritius) Seychelles Somalia Somaliland (Unrecognized) South Africa Sudan Tanzania Zanzibar, Tanzania Asia Bahrain Bangladesh British Indian Ocean Territory Chagos Archipelago - United Kingdom Christmas Island (Australia) Cocos (Keeling) Islands (Australia) India Indonesia Iran Iraq Israel Jordan Kuwait Malaysia Maldives Myanmar Oman Pakistan Qatar Saudi Arabia Sri Lanka Thailand Timor-Leste United Arab Emirates Yemen Other Antarctica Australian Antarctic Territory French Southern and Antarctic Lands Heard Island and McDonald Islands Australia   International membership v t e Association of Southeast Asian Nations Politics Charter Customs union Date of Establishment Organisations Secretariat Treaty of Amity and Cooperation Symbols Anthem Emblem Flag Hymn Membership Brunei Cambodia Indonesia Laos Malaysia Myanmar Philippines Singapore Thailand Vietnam Observer and Candidate for Member Papua New Guinea Not Observer East Timor Candidate for Observer Bangladesh Fiji Events Summits ASEAN Summit East Asia Summit Other ASEAN Plus Three Asian Monetary Unit ASEAN Regional Forum Asia-Europe Meeting Chiang Mai Initiative Comprehensive Economic Partnership for East Asia Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership Competitions SEA Games ASEAN University Games ASEAN School Games ASEAN Para Games ASEAN Football Championship Related ASEAN Free Trade Area ASEAN–China Free Trade Area ASEAN–India Free Trade Area Common Time Economy v t e East Asia Summit (EAS) First Second Third Fourth Fifth Sixth Seventh Eighth Ninth Tenth Eleventh  Australia  Brunei  Cambodia  China  India  Indonesia  Japan  Laos  Malaysia  Myanmar  New Zealand  Philippines  Russia  Singapore  South Korea  Thailand  United States  Vietnam v t e Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC)   Australia   Brunei   Canada   Chile   China   Hong Kong¹   Indonesia   Japan   South Korea   Malaysia   Mexico   New Zealand   Papua New Guinea   Peru   Philippines   Russia   Singapore   Taiwan²   Thailand   United States   Vietnam Meetings 1989 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 Other APEC Business Travel Card APEC blue APEC Youth Science Festival 1.  A Special administrative region of China, participates as "Hong Kong, China" 2. Officially the Republic of China, participates as "Chinese Taipei" v t e Monarchies List of current sovereign monarchs List of current constituent monarchs Type Absolute Constitutional Diarchy Elective Federal Hereditary By country Africa Lesotho Morocco Swaziland Americas Asia Bahrain Bhutan Brunei Cambodia Japan Jordan Kuwait Malaysia Oman Qatar Saudi Arabia Thailand United Arab Emirates Europe Belgium Denmark Netherlands Norway Spain Sweden Vatican City Oceania Tongo Commonwealth Current Antigua and Barbuda Australia Bahamas Barbados Belize Canada Grenada Jamaica Cook Islands New Zealand Niue Papua New Guinea St. Kitts and Nevis St. Lucia St. Vincent and the Grenadines Solomon Islands Tuvalu United Kingdom Former Fiji Irish Free State South Africa Authority control WorldCat Identities VIAF: 236517938 GND: 4078228-1 NDL: 00572496 Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Thailand&oldid=718593669" Categories: Thailand Kingdoms Member states of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations Member states of the United Nations Southeast Asian countries Hidden categories: Articles with Thai-language external links All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from October 2013 CS1 errors: dates All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from December 2014 Wikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pages Wikipedia indefinitely move-protected pages EngvarB from October 2015 Use dmy dates from October 2015 Articles needing additional references from March 2014 All articles needing additional references Coordinates on Wikidata Articles containing Thai-language text Articles with unsourced statements from June 2015 All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from June 2015 Wikipedia articles needing clarification from June 2015 Articles with unsourced statements from September 2011 Articles to be expanded from November 2013 All articles to be expanded Articles using small message boxes Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2006 All articles containing potentially dated statements Articles with unsourced statements from April 2013 Articles with unsourced statements from January 2015 Articles with dead external links from January 2015 Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2012 Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2013 Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2010 Articles with unsourced statements from March 2015 Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2009 Commons category with local link same as on Wikidata Articles with DMOZ links Articles with dead external links from October 2014 Wikipedia articles with VIAF identifiers Wikipedia articles with GND identifiers Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Article Talk Variants Views Read View source View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Featured content Current events Random article Donate to Wikipedia Wikipedia store Interaction Help About Wikipedia Community portal Recent changes Contact page Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Cite this page Print/export Create a book Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikivoyage Languages Acèh Адыгэбзэ Afrikaans Alemannisch አማርኛ Ænglisc العربية Aragonés Arpetan অসমীয়া Asturianu Avañe'ẽ Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه বাংলা Bahasa Banjar Bân-lâm-gú Basa Banyumasan Башҡортса Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца)‎ भोजपुरी Bikol Central Български Boarisch བོད་ཡིག Bosanski Brezhoneg Буряад Català Чӑвашла Cebuano Čeština ChiShona ChiTumbuka Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch ދިވެހިބަސް Diné bizaad Dolnoserbski ཇོང་ཁ Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Estremeñu Euskara فارسی Fiji Hindi Føroyskt Français Frysk Furlan Gaeilge Gaelg Gagauz Gàidhlig Galego 贛語 Gĩkũyũ ગુજરાતી गोंयची कोंकणी / Gõychi Konknni 客家語/Hak-kâ-ngî Хальмг 한국어 Hausa Hawaiʻi Հայերեն हिन्दी Hornjoserbsce Hrvatski Ido Ilokano বিষ্ণুপ্রিয়া মণিপুরী Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Interlingue Ирон Íslenska Italiano עברית Basa Jawa Kalaallisut ಕನ್ನಡ Kapampangan ქართული Kaszëbsczi Қазақша Kernowek Kinyarwanda Kiswahili Коми Kreyòl ayisyen Kurdî Кыргызча Лезги ລາວ لۊری شومالی Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvių Ligure Limburgs Lingála La .lojban. Lumbaart Magyar Македонски Malagasy മലയാളം मराठी მარგალური مصرى مازِرونی Bahasa Melayu Baso Minangkabau Mìng-dĕ̤ng-ngṳ̄ Монгол မြန်မာဘာသာ Nāhuatl Dorerin Naoero Nederlands Nedersaksies नेपाली नेपाल भाषा 日本語 Нохчийн Nordfriisk Norfuk / Pitkern Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Novial Occitan Олык марий ଓଡ଼ିଆ Oromoo Oʻzbekcha/ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پنجابی Papiamentu پښتو ភាសាខ្មែរ Picard Piemontèis Tok Pisin Plattdüütsch Polski Português Qaraqalpaqsha Qırımtatarca Română Runa Simi Русиньскый Русский Саха тыла Sámegiella Gagana Samoa संस्कृतम् Sängö Scots Seeltersk Shqip Sicilianu සිංහල Simple English SiSwati Slovenčina Slovenščina Ślůnski Soomaaliga کوردیی ناوەندی Sranantongo Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Basa Sunda Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் Tarandíne Татарча/tatarça తెలుగు Tetun ไทย Тоҷикӣ ᏣᎳᎩ Türkçe Türkmençe Twi Удмурт ᨅᨔ ᨕᨘᨁᨗ Українська اردو ئۇيغۇرچە / Uyghurche Vahcuengh Vèneto Vepsän kel’ Tiếng Việt Volapük Võro 文言 West-Vlams Winaray Wolof 吴语 ייִדיש Yorùbá 粵語 Zazaki Zeêuws Žemaitėška 中文 Адыгабзэ मैथिली Edit links This page was last modified on 4 May 2016, at 12:43. Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view