Malesia - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Malesia From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to: navigation, search For other uses, see Malesia (disambiguation). This article is about the biogeographical region. For the country, see Malaysia. WGSRPD version 1 definition WGSRPD version 2 definition Malesia is a biogeographical region straddling the Equator and the boundaries of the Indomalaya ecozone and Australasia ecozone, and also a phytogeographical floristic region in the Paleotropical Kingdom. It has been given different definitions. The World Geographic Scheme for Recording Plant Distributions split off Papuasia in its 2001 version. Contents 1 Floristic province 1.1 Sundaland 1.2 Philippines 1.3 Wallacea 1.4 New Guinea and the Bismarck Archipelago 2 See also 3 References 4 External links Floristic province[edit] Malesia was first identified as a floristic region that included the Malay Peninsula, the Malay Archipelago, New Guinea, and the Bismarck Archipelago,[1] based on a shared tropical flora derived mostly from Asia but also with numerous elements of the Antarctic flora, including many species in the southern conifer families Podocarpaceae and Araucariaceae. The floristic region overlaps four distinct mammalian faunal regions. The first edition of the World Geographical Scheme for Recording Plant Distributions (WGSRPD) used this definition, but in the second edition of 2001, New Guinea and the Bismarck Archipelago removed from Malesia and were united with the Solomon Islands, previously placed in the WGSRPD's Southwestern Pacific region, being placed into a new region, Papuasia.[2] Sundaland[edit] Main article: Sundaland The western part of Malesia, which includes the Malay Peninsula and the islands of Sumatra, Java, Bali, and Borneo, shares the large mammal fauna of Asia and is known as Sundaland. These islands are on Asia's relatively shallow continental shelf, and were linked to Asia during the ice ages, when sea levels were lower. The eastern edge of Sundaland is the Wallace line, named after Alfred Russel Wallace, the nineteenth-century British naturalist who noted the difference in fauna between islands on either side of the line. Dipterocarps are predominant trees in the lowland forests of Sundaland.[3] Philippines[edit] Main article: Ecoregions of the Philippines Most of the Philippines were never connected to the Asian mainland, and have a largely Asian-derived flora, and a distinct mammalian fauna. Wallacea[edit] Main article: Wallacea The islands between Sundaland and New Guinea, called Wallacea, were never linked to the neighboring continents, and have a flora and fauna that include Indomalayan and Australasian elements. New Guinea and the Bismarck Archipelago[edit] Together with the Solomon Islands, New Guinea and the Bismarck Archipelago are placed in Papuasia rather than Malesia in the second version of the WGSRPD. The eastern end of the earlier definition of Malesia, which includes New Guinea and the Aru Islands of eastern Indonesia, is linked to Australia by a shallow continental shelf, and shares many marsupial mammal and bird taxa with Australia. New Guinea also has many additional elements of the Antarctic flora, including southern beech (Nothofagus) and eucalypts. New Guinea has the highest mountains in Malesia and Papuasia, and vegetation ranges from tropical lowland forest to tundra. See also[edit] Phytochorion - floristic regions and provinces References[edit] ^ Wikramanayake, Eric; Eric Dinerstein; Colby J. Loucks; et al. (2002). Terrestrial Ecoregions of the Indo-Pacific: a Conservation Assessment. Island Press; Washington, DC. p 61 ^ Brummitt, R.K. (2001). World Geographical Scheme for Recording Plant Distributions: Edition 2 (PDF). International Working Group on Taxonomic Databases For Plant Sciences (TDWG). Retrieved 2006-11-27.  ^ Wikramanayake, Eric; Eric Dinerstein; Colby J. Loucks; et al. (2002). Terrestrial Ecoregions of the Indo-Pacific: a Conservation Assessment. Island Press; Washington, DC. p 61 External links[edit] Media related to Indomalaya at Wikimedia Commons Media related to Animals of Malesia at Wikimedia Commons v t e Floristic regions of the world Holarctic Kingdom Circumboreal Eastern Asiatic North American Atlantic Rocky Mountain Macaronesian Mediterranean Saharo-Arabian Irano-Turanian Madrean Paleotropical Kingdom Guineo-Congolian Usambara-Zululand Sudano-Zambezian Karoo-Namib St. Helena and Ascension Madagascan Indian Indochinese Malesian Fijian Polynesian Hawaiian Neocaledonian Australian Neotropical Kingdom Caribbean Guayana Highlands Amazonian Brazilian Andean South African Kingdom Cape Antarctic Kingdom Fernandezian Chile-Patagonian South Subantarctic Islands Neozeylandic Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Malesia&oldid=687881370" Categories: Flora of Malesia Indomalaya ecozone Paleotropical flora Floristic regions Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Article Talk Variants Views Read Edit View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Featured content Current events Random article Donate to Wikipedia Wikipedia store Interaction Help About Wikipedia Community portal Recent changes Contact page Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Cite this page Print/export Create a book Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Languages Català Deutsch Español Esperanto Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Nederlands 日本語 Русский தமிழ் Українська Tiếng Việt Edit links This page was last modified on 28 October 2015, at 08:52. Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view