Flag of Victoria - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Flag of Victoria From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to: navigation, search Victoria Use Civil and state flag Proportion 1:2 Adopted 1870 Design State badge of a Southern Cross topped by St Edward's Crown, on a defaced British Blue Ensign The state badge The flag of Victoria, symbolising the state of Victoria in Australia, is a British Blue Ensign defaced by the state badge of Victoria in the fly. The badge is the Southern Cross topped by an imperial crown, which is currently the St Edward's Crown. The stars of the Southern Cross are white and range from five to eight points with each star having one point pointing to the top of the flag. The flag dates from 1870,[1] with minor variations, the last of which was in 1953. Contents 1 Previous flags 2 Gallery 3 References 4 External links Previous flags[edit] The first flag of Victoria was adopted in 1870 and was first flown from HMVS Nelson on 9 February 1870. It too was a defaced British Blue Ensign with the Southern Cross located in the fly. The stars of the Southern Cross were white and had 5, 6, 7, 8 and 9 points with only the leftmost and rightmost stars having one point pointing to the top of the flag. The adoption of the flag came about when Victoria became the first Australian colony to acquire a warship, and thus under the British Colonial Naval Defence Act of 1865 Victoria needed a flag to distinguish its ships from other British ships. At the same time, the red ensign was incorrectly authorised for use by civil vessels registered in the colony of Victoria. Despite the invalid authorisation, the flag continued to be used, and was flown alongside the Union flag during federation celebrations in 1901. The red ensign did not track changes to the blue ensign, and so no crown was added, nor did the stars rotate to point upwards facing the flag. Victoria then adopted the current flag in 1877 with the stars of the southern cross from then on having 5, 6, 7, 7 and 8 points. The depictions of the crown have varied in accordance with heraldic fashion and the wishes of the monarch of the time. During Queen Victoria's reign, the crown had slightly dipped arches. From c. 1901–1952, during the reigns of Kings Edward VII, George V, Edward VIII and George VI the depiction of the crown known as the "Tudor Crown", with domed arches, was used. In 1953 the Tudor Crown was replaced with the St Edward's Crown. Gallery[edit] Standard of the Governor of Victoria Flag of the Victoria Police Standard of the Governor of Victoria 1903-1984. Prior to 1953, a Tudor Crown was used Victorian red ensign, 1870 References[edit] ^ "Victorian Flag". Department of Premier and Cabinet, Government of Victoria. 9 March 2016.  External links[edit] Victoria at Flags of the World Flags flown by HMVS Cerberus Heraldry portal Victoria portal v t e Flags of Australia National Queen's Personal Australian Flag Governor-General National flag Aboriginal Torres Strait Islander Red Ensign White Ensign Air Force Ensign Civil Aviation Ensign Defence Force Ensign Border Force Honour Flag Boxing Kangaroo Subnational Australian Capital Territory Christmas Island Cocos (Keeling) Islands New South Wales (Lord Howe Island) Norfolk Island Northern Territory Queensland South Australia Tasmania Victoria Western Australia Governors of the States Historical Anti-Transportation League Flag Bowman Flag Eureka Flag Federation Flag Murray River Flag National Colonial Flag Van Diemen's Land Ensign Australian Honour Flag Other Proposals for a new national flag v t e National and regional flags incorporating the Union Jack Sovereign states Australia Fiji New Zealand Tuvalu United Kingdom Dependent territories United Kingdom Anguilla Ascension Island Bermuda British Antarctic Territory British Indian Ocean Territory British Virgin Islands Cayman Islands Falkland Islands Montserrat Pitcairn Islands Saint Helena South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands Tristan da Cunha Turks and Caicos Islands New Zealand Cook Islands Niue States, provinces and other administrative divisions Australia New South Wales Queensland South Australia Tasmania Victoria Western Australia Lord Howe Island Canada British Columbia Manitoba Ontario United States Hawaii Cities Chile Coquimbo United States Baton Rouge, Louisiana Taunton, Massachusetts Miscellaneous Flags based on British ensigns List of British flags Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Flag_of_Victoria&oldid=718173633" Categories: Victoria (Australia) Flags of Australia Blue Ensigns Southern Cross flags Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Article Talk Variants Views Read Edit View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Featured content Current events Random article Donate to Wikipedia Wikipedia store Interaction Help About Wikipedia Community portal Recent changes Contact page Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Cite this page Print/export Create a book Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Languages Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español فارسی Italiano עברית Magyar Nederlands Polski Português 粵語 中文 Edit links This page was last modified on 1 May 2016, at 23:34. Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view