List of Canadian flags - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia List of Canadian flags From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to: navigation, search The flags of Vancouver, Canada, and British Columbia; the Canadian flag takes place of precedence in the centre The Canadian national flag flying next to a statue of Terry Fox This is a list of flags used in Canada. The Department of Canadian Heritage lays out protocol guidelines for the display of flags, including an order of precedence; these instructions are only conventional, however, and are generally intended to show respect for what are considered important symbols of the state or institutions.[1] The Queen's personal standard is supreme in the order of precedence, followed by those for the monarch's representatives (depending on jurisdiction), the personal flags of other members of the Royal Family,[2] and then the national flag and provincial flags. Many museums across Canada display historic flags in their exhibits. The Canadian Museum of History, in Hull, Quebec has many culturally important flags in their collections. Settlers, Rails & Trails Inc., in Argyle, Manitoba holds the 2nd largest exhibit - known as the Canadian Flag Collection. Contents 1 Royal 2 Viceregal and administrative 2.1 Governor general 2.2 Lieutenant governors 2.3 Commissioners 3 Civil and state 3.1 National 3.2 Ceremonial 3.3 Provincial 3.4 Territorial 3.5 Regional (unofficial) 4 Military, police, coast guard and border services 4.1 Canada Border Services Agency 4.2 Canadian Armed Forces 4.3 Coast Guard 4.4 Police 5 Municipal 6 Crown corporations 7 Indigenous nations 8 Francophone peoples 9 Historical flags 9.1 National flags 9.2 Vice-regal flags 9.3 Military flags 10 Others/Non-official flags 11 University flags 12 Organizational flags 13 Corporate flags 14 See also 15 Notes 16 References 17 External links Royal[edit] Flag Date Name Description 1962–present Royal Standard of Canada A banner of the Royal Arms of Canada defaced with a royal cypher of Queen Elizabeth II 2011–present Royal Standard of the Prince of Wales A banner of the Royal Arms of Canada defaced with the Prince of Wales's feathers and a 3-point label. 2011–present Royal Standard of the Duke of Cambridge A banner of the Royal Arms of Canada defaced with the royal cypher of Prince William, Duke of Cambridge, and a 3-point label with one red scallop, representing the coat of arms of his mother, Diana, Princess of Wales. 2013–present Royal Standard of the Princess Royal A banner of the Royal Arms of Canada defaced with the royal cypher of the Princess Anne, Princess Royal, and a 3-point label with one heart in the centre, and the other two, Saint-George's crosses. 2014–present Royal standard of the Duke of York A banner of the Royal Arms of Canada defaced with the royal cypher of the Prince Andrew, Duke of York, and a 3-point label with an anchor in the centre and the other two, blank. 2014–present Royal standard of the Earl of Wessex A banner of the Royal Arms of Canada defaced with the royal cypher of the His Royal Highness the Prince Edward, Earl of Wessex, and a 3-point label with a Tudor Rose in the centre and the other two, blank. 2015–present Royal standard for Members of the Royal Family A banner of the Royal Arms of Canada surrounded by an ermine border Viceregal and administrative[edit] Governor general[edit] Flag Date Name Description 1981–1999 2002–present Standard of the Governor General of Canada A blue field with the crest of the Royal Arms of Canada charged in the centre Lieutenant governors[edit] Flag Date Name Description 1981–present Standard of the Lieutenant Governor of Ontario A blue field with the shield of the coat of arms of Ontario, ensigned with a St. Edward's Crown and surrounded a wreath of by ten golden maple leaves, charged in the centre 1950–present Standard of the Lieutenant Governor of Quebec A blue field with the shield of the coat of arms of Quebec, ensigned with a Tudor Crown and within a white disc, charged in the centre 1929–present Standard of the Lieutenant Governor of Nova Scotia The Royal Union Flag defaced with the shield of the coat of arms of Nova Scotia on a white disc and surrounded by a chain of green maple leaves 1982–present Standard of the Lieutenant Governor of New Brunswick A blue field with the shield of the coat of arms of New Brunswick, ensigned with a St. Edward's Crown and surrounded by a wreath of ten golden maple leaves, charged in the centre 1984–present Standard of the Lieutenant Governor of Manitoba A blue field with the shield of the coat of arms of Manitoba, ensigned with a St. Edward's Crown and surrounded by a wreath of ten golden maple leaves, charged in the centre 1982–present Standard of the Lieutenant Governor of British Columbia A blue field with the shield of the coat of arms of British Columbia, ensigned with a St. Edward's Crown and surrounded by a wreath of ten golden maple leaves, charged in the centre 1981–present Standard of the Lieutenant Governor of Prince Edward Island A blue field with the shield of the coat of arms of Prince Edward Island, ensigned with a St. Edward's Crown and surrounded by a wreath of ten golden maple leaves, charged in the centre 1981–present Standard of the Lieutenant Governor of Saskatchewan A blue field with the shield of the coat of arms of Saskatchewan, ensigned with a St. Edward's Crown and surrounded by a wreath of ten golden maple leaves, charged in the centre 1981–present Standard of the Lieutenant Governor of Alberta A blue field with the shield of the coat of arms of Alberta, ensigned with a St. Edward's Crown and surrounded by a wreath of ten golden maple leaves, charged in the centre 1987–present Standard of the Lieutenant Governor of Newfoundland and Labrador A blue field with the shield of the coat of arms of Newfoundland and Labrador, ensigned with a St. Edward's Crown and surrounded by a wreath of ten golden maple leaves, charged in the centre Commissioners[edit] Flag Date Name Description 2007–present Standard of the Commissioner of Northwest Territories A blue field with the shield of the Coat of arms of the Northwest Territories, surrounded by a wreath of six gold maple leaves and two flowers, charged in the centre 2006–present Standard of the Commissioner of Yukon A blue field with the shield of the coat of arms of Yukon, surrounded by a wreath of six gold maple leaves and two flowers, charged in the centre 2009–present Standard of the Commissioner of Nunavut A blue field with the shield of the coat of arms of Nunavut, surrounded by a wreath of six gold maple leaves and two flowers, charged in the centre Civil and state[edit] National[edit] Flag Date Name Description 1965–present National Flag of Canada (Maple Leaf Flag, l'Unifolié) A vertical bicolour triband of red, white, red with a red maple leaf emblem charged in the Canadian pale Ceremonial[edit] Flag Date Name Description 1965–present Royal Union Flag The Cross of St. Andrew counterchanged with the Cross of St. Patrick and over all the Cross of St. George Provincial[edit] Flag Date Name Description 1965–present Flag of Ontario A red field with the Royal Union Flag in the canton and the shield of the coat of arms of Ontario charged in the fly 1948–present Flag of Quebec (The Fleurdelisé) A blue field with an ordinary white cross and a white fleur-de-lis in each quadrant 1858–present Flag of Nova Scotia A banner of the coat of arms of Nova Scotia 1965–present Flag of New Brunswick A banner of the coat of arms of New Brunswick 1965–present Flag of Manitoba A red field with the Royal Union Flag in the canton and the shield of the coat of arms of Manitoba charged in the fly 1960–present Flag of British Columbia A banner of the coat of arms of British Columbia 1964–present Flag of Prince Edward Island A banner of the coat of arms of Prince Edward Island within a bordure compony of red and white 1969–present Flag of Saskatchewan A field party per fess, green and yellow, with the shield of the coat of arms of Saskatchewan in the canton and western red lily emblem charged in the fly 1968–present Flag of Alberta A blue field with the shield of the coat of arms of Alberta charged in the centre 1980–present Flag of Newfoundland and Labrador A blue and white field party per pale (at nombril point) with a white border, white ordinary cross and white saltire, two triangular divisions in the fly lined in red, a golden arrow between Territorial[edit] Flag Date Name Description 1969–present Flag of the Northwest Territories A vertical bicolour triband of blue, white, blue with the shield of the coat of arms of the Northwest Territories charged in the Canadian pale 1968–present Flag of Yukon A vertical tricolour triband of green, white, blue with the shield of the coat of arms of Yukon above a wreath of fireweed charged in the Canadian pale 1999–present Flag of Nunavut A field party per pale, yellow and white, with a red inukshuk charged in the centre and a blue star in the upper fly Regional (unofficial)[edit] This list is incomplete; you can help by expanding it. Flag Date Name Description 1832–present Patriote flag The proposed flag of Republic of Lower Canada in 1838, still used nowadays by some separatists, in mostly 4 variants : the original and three versions with the yellow star in the top left corner. Of which, two of them have Henri Julien's Patriot painting of 1904, one in colour and the other stylised in black and white. 1837–1838 Flag of the Republic of Canada Two white stars representing the colonies of Upper and Lower Canada on the upper half with "LIBERTY" inscribed on the lower half. 1880s–present Newfoundland Tricolour A field tierced per pale, green, white, and pink 1884–present Flag of Acadia A field tierced per pale, blue, white, and red, with a gold star in the upper hoist. Common in Prince Edward Island, New Brunswick, Quebec, and Nova Scotia. 1938–present Flag of Saguenay-Lac-Saint-Jean A field party per fess, green and yellow, with a red-bordered grey ordinary cross; green represents the region's forests, yellow its agriculture, grey its industry and commerce, and red the vitality of the population 1974–present Flag of Labrador A field party per fess, white and azure, with a green horizontal band across the centre and a spruce twig in the upper hoist 1988–present Flag of Vancouver Island A Blue Ensign defaced with the great seal of the Colony of Vancouver Island. Used informally today.[3] This unofficial flag was designed in the 1980s to retroactively represent the colony (1849–1866). In 1865 permission was given from the Crown to colonies to place their badges on the fly of the Blue Ensign and as such could be argued by vexillologists that this could be an official flag.[4] 1988–present Flag of Western Canada Originally used by the Western Independence Party, it was created in 1988 ahead of the party's first election. 1994–present Flag of Cascadia A proposed nation that would consist mainly of British Columbia as well as the American states Washington and Oregon. The blue represents the sky, Pacific Ocean, Salish Sea and inland waters, the white represents snow and clouds and the green to represent the evergreen forests and fields. The tree is a Douglas-fir, which symbolizes endurance, defiance and resilience. Military, police, coast guard and border services[edit] Canada Border Services Agency[edit] Flag Date Name Description 2012–present Flag of the Canada Border Services Agency A Blue field with the National Flag of Canada in the canton and the Canada Border Services Agency badge charged in the fly Canadian Armed Forces[edit] This list is incomplete; you can help by expanding it. Flag Date Name Description 1968–present Flag of the Canadian Forces A white field with the National Flag of Canada in the canton and the Canadian Forces badge charged in the fly 1968–present Canadian Naval Ensign A white field with the National Flag of Canada in the canton and the Royal Canadian Navy badge in blue charged in the fly 1968–present Canadian Forces Auxiliary Jack A blue field with the National Flag of Canada in the canton and the Royal Canadian Navy badge in white charged in the fly 2014–present Flag of the Canadian Army A white field with the National Flag of Canada in the canton and the Canadian Army badge charged in the fly 1982–present Royal Canadian Air Force Ensign A field of air force blue with the National Flag of Canada in the canton and the Royal Canadian Air Force roundel charged in the fly c. 1964–present Flag of the Canadian Navy Board A field party per bend, blue and sanguine, with a fouled anchor in gold charged in the centre 1920–present Flag of the Royal Military College of Canada A field tierced per pale, red, white, and red with the badge of the Royal Military College of Canada charged in the centre Unknown-present Flag of the Royal Military College Saint-Jean A field tierced per pale, blue, white, and blue with the badge of the Royal Military College Saint-Jean charged in the centre 2000–present Banner of the Commander-in-Chief Unit Commendation A field tierced per pale, blue, red, and azure, with the crest of the Royal Arms of Canada charged in the centre Coast Guard[edit] Flag Date Name Description 1962–present Flag of the Canadian Coast Guard A banner of the arms of the Canadian Coast Guard: vertical diband of white and blue, a red maple leaf emblem charged in the hoist and a pair of fish in gold and facing opposite directions charged in the fly Police[edit] Flag Date Name Description 1991–present Ensign of the Royal Canadian Mounted Police A red field with a blue canton bordered yellow with a representation of the Badge of the RCMP 2005–present Flag of the Sûreté du Québec A green field, on a Canadian Pale Yellow charged with the badge of the Sûreté du Québec Municipal[edit] This list is incomplete; you can help by expanding it. Flag Date Name Description 2005–present Flag of Barrie Argent three bars gemel wavy Azure, on a chief Gules a naval crown between a winged wheel and a cog wheel Or 1999–present Flag of Burlington A vertical bicolour triband of blue, yellow, blue with the shield of the coat of arms of Burlington charged in the Canadian pale 1983–present Flag of Calgary A red field with white border at top and bottom, a combined 'C' and cowboy hat emblem in the hoist 1989–present Flag of Charlottetown A banner of the Arms — Argent on a square Vert joined at each corner with a smaller square Vert a representation of the coronation crown of Queen Charlotte Sophia of England proper — the three edges in chief fly and base charged with a bordure compony Vert and Argent 1995–present Flag of Cornwall A vertical bicolour triband of gold, black, gold with the shield of the coat of arms of the Duke of Cornwall charged in the Canadian pale 2005–present Flag of Delta Vert a plate environed of a triangle voided of the field couped on each corner Argent Unknown-present Flag of Dollard-des-Ormeaux 1966–present Flag of Edmonton Incorporates the City of Edmonton Coat of Arms on a white field with two blue borders. Blue symbolizes strength and the North Saskatchewan River; white signifies peace. 2003–present Flag of Fernie Azure on a fess Or, its upper edge dancetty, three lozenges Sable. Fergie also has a second flag (not shown): Or the Badge of The Corporation of the City of Fernie, a canton of the Arms 1999–present Flag of Gloucester Or on a cross raguly Vert a maple leaf Or 1993–present Flag of Guelph Per fess Gules and Argent in dexter chief a horse's head erased Argent and in dexter base an ancient crown Gules 2003–present Flag of Hamilton A vertical bicolour triband of gold, blue, gold with a cinquefoil surrounded by a chain, all gold, charged in the Canadian pale 1996–present Flag of Halifax, Nova Scotia Azure a saltire Or and a bezant merged thereon a Kingfisher between four broad arrows points outward Azure in fess two sailing vessels tempore 1760 flags flying to the dexter Or. The principal charge identifies Halifax as the provincial seat of government; the four arms represent its predecessor municipalities. The kingfisher is drawn from the arms of the City of Halifax; the ships and arrows recall the emblems of Dartmouth and Bedford. Unknown–present Flag of Laval 1967–present Flag of Lethbridge Red and white striped, with blue and white pattern in top left corner. 2002–present Flag of Lévis A black and gold field with a white cross. 2004–present Flag of Longueuil Azure three roses Or, on a chief Gules a crescent between two mullets Or Unknown-present Flag of La Matapédia Regional County Municipality Three colours flag (blue, green and white) showing mountains, a tree and a salmon. 1954–1997 Flag of Metro Toronto A horizontal bi-colour band of green and blue with a white ringed symbol from the seal of Metro Toronto; the six rings represented Metro Toronto's six constituent lower-tier municipalities: Etobicoke, York, North York, East York, Scarborough and the former city of Toronto 1939–present Flag of Montreal A white field with a red ordinary cross, a blue fleur-de-lis, a Lancastrian rose, a thistle, and a shamrock, all proper, in each quadrant 1989–present Flag of North Cowichan Or on a pale Vert an inescutcheon of the Arms of the District of North Cowichan: Or on a fess raguly Vert between two bars wavy Azure a Pacific Sockeye salmon (Oncorhynchus nerka) naiant Argent between two dogwood flowers (Cornus nuttallii) also Argent seeded Or 1902–1987 Flag of Ottawa 1987-2000 Flag of Ottawa 2000–present Flag of Ottawa A field party per pale enarched, blue and azure, with a stylised 'O' emblem charged in the centre 1999–present Flag of Peterborough Vert a sword point downwards Argent pommel and hilt Or surmounted by a fess barry wavy of six Argent and Azure 1995–present Flag of Prince George Per fess wavy Azure and Or a fess wavy counterchanged of the field between in chief two snowflakes Argent and in base a fraise Azure 1987–present Flag of Quebec City Azure an ancient ship under full sail Or within an embattled bordure Argent. The ship represents Samuel de Champlain's Don de Dieu; the background represents the city walls 1992–present Flag of Regina Azure a base Or in canton a representation of the Royal Crown Argent 1969–present Flag of Scarborough Unknown-present Flag of Saint-Damien Unknown-present Flag of Saint-Éphrem-de-Beauce 1965–present Flag of St. John's John the Baptist is symbolized on the shield by the lamb, carrying a banner bearing St. George’s Cross. The shield is supported on the left by John Cabot bearing the year (1497) of discovery. The supporter on the right is Sir Humphrey Gilbert, bearing the date 1583 that he founded the city and claimed Newfoundland for Queen Elizabeth of England. Unknown-present Flag of Shawinigan 2003–present Flag of Sudbury Per fess sapiné Vert and Or, in dexter chief a mullet Or Unknown-present Flag of Summerside 1999–present Flag of Toronto A blue field with a white styleised city hall and maple leaf emblem Unknown-present Flag of Thunder Bay Unknown-present Flag of Trois-Rivières 1983–present Flag of Vancouver The axe and paddle stand for the traditional industries, logging and fishing, and the green background is a symbol of the forests 1962–present Flag of Victoria Bleu-celeste the shield of Arms of the City of Victoria [Note: The arms depicted are incorrect (Azure on a pile Argent another Gules charged with the Royal Crown proper)] 1975–present Flag of Winnipeg The blue represents Winnipeg's clear blue sky, and the gold a field of wheat surrounding the city's coat of arms 1971–present Flag of Windsor Designed by an unknown citizen during a local contest, the flag includes the city seal along with a red rose; the blue and white represent the Detroit River and Saint Lawrence Seaway, respectively.[5] 1992–present[nb 1] Flag of Windsor Azure on a Canadian pale Argent the shield of Arms of the City of Windsor; Arms: Or on a pale between two roses Gules barbed Vert charged with a cogwheel Or a fleur de lys Or above a rose Or barbed Vert charged with a cogwheel Gules a chief undy Azure. 1971?–present Flag of Yellowknife The blue represents the clear blue waters of Yellowknife Bay and other bodies of water in and around Yellowknife, and the gold represents Yellowknife's gold mining heritage, with the city's crest in the pale Crown corporations[edit] This list is incomplete; you can help by expanding it. Flag Date Name Description Unknown Flag of the Royal Canadian Mint A red field with the logo of the Royal Canadian Mint charged in the centre; logo was first introduced in 1978 Indigenous nations[edit] This list is incomplete; you can help by expanding it. Flag Date Name Description Pre-1816–present Flag of the Métis Nation of Canada A blue field with a white symbol of infinity charged in the centre Pre-1816–present Flag of the Métis Nation of Alberta A red field with a white symbol of infinity charged in the centre 1980s-present Flag of the Iroquois Confederacy A mauve field party per fess by a band of white squares joined and a stylized white "Tree of Peace" charged in the centre; design is adapted from the Hiawatha wampum belt, each element represents an original nation in the confederacy Mid-1980s-present Flag of the Natuaqanek Band A red field with yellow left and right borders, a quartered roundel charged in the centre[7] 2001–present Flag of the Nisga'a A vertical tricolour triband of black, white, and sanguine with the badge of the Nisga'a Nation,[8] surrounded by black and sanguine ovals, charged in the Canadian pale[9] 2005–present Flag of Nunatsiavut A white field with a white, green, and blue Inukshuk charged in the centre Unknown–present Flag of the Haida Nation A red field with an eagle and raven headed bird, surrounded by a circlet, charged in the centre Unknown-present Flag of the Matimekush Band A vertical tricolour triband of chartreuse, white, green with the coat of arms of the Matimekush Lac John Band charged in the Canadian pale Unknown–present Flag of the Mi'kmaq Nation Grand Council A white field with a red Latin cross and a red star and moon in the left quadrants; white denotes purity of creation, the red cross represents mankind and infinity, the sun and moon the forces of day and night,[7] the flag is meant to be displayed hanging vertically as shown here [10] Francophone peoples[edit] See also: Flags of French-speaking people of North America Flag Date Name Description 1975–present Flag of the Franco-Ontarians A field party per fess, green and white, with a white fleur-de-lys charged in the hoist and a green trillium emblem charged in the fly 1976–present Flag of the Fransaskois A yellow field with a green Nordic cross centred towards the upper hoist and a red fleur-de-lis charged in the lower fly 1980–present Flag of the Franco-Manitobains A white field with yellow over sanguine bars with a green plant emblem in four pieces charged in the hoist 1981–present Flag of the Franco-Columbians A white field party per pale by a bar gemelles and dancetty, a fleur-de-lys and Pacific Dogwood emblem charged in the fly; Dogwood is the floral emblem of British Columbia, the blue stripes evoke the Pacific Ocean and the rising mountains beside, the yellow centre of the Dogwood flower represents the sun 1982–present Flag of the Franco-Albertans A field party per bend sinister, blue and white, by a bend cotised white and blue with a white fleur-de-lys in the upper hoist and a red wild rose in the lower fly 1985–present Flag of the Franco-Yukonnais A blue field and three diagonal stripes set from lower hoist to upper fly. The colours of the stripes are white and golden yellow. The effect created by the arrangement of the stripes is meant to represent Yukon's many mountains. Blue is for the French people and the sky. White is for winter and snow. Yellow represents the gold rush and the Franco-Yukonnais contributions to history of the territory. 1986–present Flag of the Fédération des Francophones de Terre-Neuve et du Labrador (Franco-Terreneuviens) Three unequal panels of blue, white, and red, with two yellow sails set on the line between the white and red panels. The sail on top is charged with a spruce twig, while the bottom sail is charged with a pitcher flower. 1992–present Flag of the Franco-Ténois A polar bear on a snowy hill, looking forward towards a snowflake/Fleur-de-lis combined, representing the French community of the Northwest Territories of Canada. 2002–present Flag of the Franco-Nunavois Blue that represents the Arctic sky and white recalls the snow, abundantly present on the territory. The principal shape represent an igloo, and under this one, the inukshuk which symbolise the human presence. A single dandelion flower grows from beneath it. Historical flags[edit] National flags[edit] This list is incomplete; you can help by expanding it. Flag Date Name Description 1957–1965 Canadian Red Ensign, used as the de facto National Flag of Canada; unofficial. Red Ensign defaced with the Royal Arms of Canada. The maple leaves at the bottom of the shield are red. 1922–1957 Canadian Red Ensign, used as the de facto National Flag of Canada; unofficial. Red Ensign defaced with the Royal Arms of Canada. The maple leaves at the bottom of the shield are green. 1868–1922 Used as the de facto National Flag of Canada; unofficial. Red Ensign defaced with the arms of the four original provinces of Canada 1674–1949 Officially endorsed by King Charles II in 1674 as the Colony of Newfoundland's flag Red Ensign defaced with the Great Seal of Newfoundland 1801–1965 Canada's de jure flag until 1965 (when the current national was adopted), known as the Royal Union Flag The Union Flag, the royal flag of the United Kingdom in use since 1801 1763–1801 Flag hoisted in most military installations in Quebec and later for both Upper Canada and Lower Canada Flag used for the Province of Quebec from 1763 to 1791. 1789–1830 Flag used in presence of the French Royal family as of 1789. Flag used after restoration of the Monarchy in France from 1814-1830. 1715–1789 Flag of the Kingdom of France used since Louis XIV. Flag used along with the flags of French regiments. 1663–1715 Flag of New France? Standard of King Louis XIV. Flag seen in New France prior to the flag of the Kingdom of France. 1638-1790 Naval flag of the Kingdom of France Flag used on French war ships. 1689-1790 Merchant marine flag on French ships from 1689 to 1790. Flag used on French merchant ships. 1600-1689 Merchant marine flag on French ships from 1600 to 1689. Flag on Samuel de Champlain's ship. 1348-1707 Flag of the Kingdom of England Flag on John Cabot's ship, and used during the English colonization of the Americas before the Act of Union. 1286-1707 Flag of the Kingdom of Scotland Flag used during the Scottish colonization of the Americas before the Act of Union. Vice-regal flags[edit] This list is incomplete; you can help by expanding it. Flag Date Name Description 1999–2002 Flag of the Governor General Modification ordered by the then Governor General of Canada, The Right Honourable Roméo LeBlanc. The tongue and the claws were removed to have a more polite look. Replaced by previous flag 1952–1981 Flag of the Governor General A lion standing on a St. Edward's crown, with the name "Canada" below; replaced 1931 flag 1931–1952 Flag of the Governor General A lion standing on an Imperial/Tudor crown, with the name "Canada" below; replaced by 1952 flag 1959–1965 Flag of the Lieutenant Governor of Ontario[11] Reverted to a Union Jack with provincial badge 1965–1981 Military flags[edit] This list is incomplete; you can help by expanding it. Flag Date Name Description RCN- 1911-1965 RCSCC- 1905-1965 Used as the ensign of both the Royal Canadian Navy and used by the some Royal Canadian Sea Cadets squadrons. Generally used throughout the entire British Empire by the British Navy and still lingered on even after many commonwealths became independent and gained their own Navies. White Ensign, St George's Cross with the Union Flag in the canton. RCN- 1921–1957 RCSCC- 1929-1953 The Blue Ensign, worn as a jack by the Royal Canadian Navy and used by the RCSCC Blue Ensign defaced with the Royal Arms of Canada. The maple leaves at the bottom of the shield are green. 1957–1965 Final version of the Blue Ensign, worn as a jack by the Royal Canadian Navy and as an ensign by royal yacht clubs in Canada Blue Ensign defaced with the Royal Arms of Canada. The maple leaves at the bottom of the shield are red. 1941–1965 Royal Canadian Air Force Ensign A field of air force blue with the Union Flag in the canton and the Canadian roundel in the middle of the fly. −1965 Based King's Colour, as used by the Royal Military College of Canada King's Colour of the Royal Military College of Canada with the Union Flag. Others/Non-official flags[edit] Flag Date Name Description 1946 Proposed Flag for Canada A red British ensign defaced with a large golden maple leaf outlined in white in the fly. 1965 Canadian flag proposal by the Native Sons of Canada Party per bend Gules and Argent a maple leaf Gules 1965 Proposed Flag for Canada, known as the Pearson Pennant A blue field with a white square containing a three-leaf maple. The blue sides were meant to represent John A. Macdonald's description of the Canadian Pacific Railway and Canada's geography, "From sea to sea". 1994 Proposed flag for Canada, known as the Canadian Unity Flag Blue vertical stripes replacing part of the red bands, in approximate proportion to population of French heritage. University flags[edit] Flag Date Name Description 1884–present Queen's University Tierced in pale Azure Or and Gules in the canton an ancient crown Or 1920–present Flag of the Royal Military College of Canada Gules on a pale Argent the Crest [A dexter arm embowed vambraced and gauntleted proper holding a sprig of three maple leaves Or all ensigned by the Royal Crown proper] Organizational flags[edit] Flag Date Name Description Grand Orange Lodge of Canada An orange British ensign depicted with a red maple leaf on a white shield in the fly Anglican Church of Canada Argent, a cross Gules between four maple leaves Vert. Corporate flags[edit] A number of private corporations also use their own flags, but they are often used alongside the Maple Leaf. A list of corporations with corporate flags: CIBC Sheraton Hotels RBC Toronto Maple Leafs HBC See also[edit] Canada portal Canadian Heraldic Authority Canadian heraldry Canadian royal symbols Flags of the Lieutenant Governors of Canada Great Canadian Flag Debate List of Canadian provincial and territorial symbols Notes[edit] ^ Although this flag was formally granted to Windsor by the Canadian Heraldic Authority on 08 May 1992,[6] it appears that, after the Letters Patent had been issued, the city declined to adopt it officially.[5] References[edit] ^ Department of Canadian Heritage. "Ceremonial and Canadian Symbols Promotion > Flag Etiquette in Canada". Queen's Printer for Canada. Retrieved 18 September 2010.  ^ Department of Canadian Heritage. "Ceremonial and Canadian Symbols Promotion > Personal Flags and Standards". Queen's Printer for Canada. Retrieved 18 September 2010.  ^ FOTW Flags of the World: Vancouver Island (British Colony, Canada) ^ Flags of Canada: British Columbia ^ a b Hill, Sharon (July 20, 2015). "Windsor needs a new flag, says local blogger". The Windsor Star. Postmedia Network. Retrieved July 23, 2015.  ^ Canada Gazette, vol. 126 (25 Jul 1992), p. 2303 ^ a b "Canada > Index of Pages > First Nations > Mikmaq". Flags of the World. ISSN 1712-9842. Retrieved 20 September 2010.  ^ Canadian Heraldic Authority. "The Public Register of Arms, Flags and Badges of Canada > Nisga'a Nation". Queen's Printer for Canada. Retrieved 20 September 2010.  ^ "Canada > Index of Pages > First Nations > Nisga'a Nation". Flags of the World. ISSN 1712-9842. Retrieved 20 September 2010.  ^ Flags of the World ^ David Prothero (December 4, 1999). "The Maple Leaf Garland". Flags of the World. Retrieved April 1, 2011.  External links[edit] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Flags of Canada. World Flag Database Canadian Government Homepage- The National Flag of Canada Flags used in 1837-39 in Lower Canada Settlers, Rails & Trails (museum) Canadian Flag Collection   Links to related articles v t e Canadian flags National Royal Standard Prince of Wales Duke of Cambridge Governor General Canada Red Ensign Provinces and territories Lieutenant Governors Alberta British Columbia Manitoba New Brunswick Newfoundland and Labrador Northwest Territories Nova Scotia Nunavut Ontario Prince Edward Island Quebec Saskatchewan Yukon Cities Calgary Edmonton Hamilton Montreal Ottawa Quebec City Toronto Vancouver Victoria Winnipeg Windsor more v t e Canada History Year list (Timeline) Pre-colonization New France (1534–1763) British Canada (1763–1867) Post-Confederation (1867–1914) World Wars and Interwar Years (1914–1945) Modern times: 1945–1960 1960–1981 1982–1992 since 1992 Topics Constitutional Crown & Aboriginals Economic Etymology Former colonies & territories Immigration Military Monarchical National Historic Sites Persons of significance Territorial evolution Provinces and territories Provinces Alberta British Columbia Manitoba New Brunswick Newfoundland and Labrador Nova Scotia Ontario Prince Edward Island Quebec Saskatchewan Territories Northwest Territories Nunavut Yukon Government Law Constitution Monarch Governor general Parliament (Senate House of Commons) Prime minister (list) Courts (Supreme court) Military Local government Foreign relations Law enforcement Politics Elections LGBT rights Multiculturalism Geography Regions (west to east) Pacific Northwest Western Canada Northern Canada Canadian Shield Great Lakes Central Canada Atlantic Canada Topics Animals Cities Earthquakes Islands Mountains National Parks Plants Great Lakes Regions Rivers Economy Agriculture Banking Bank of Canada Dollar Communications Companies Energy Fishing Oil Stock exchange Taxation Tourism Transportation Science and technology Social programs Poverty Society Education Health care Crime Demographics Topics Canadians Immigration Languages Religion 2001 Census 2006 Census 2011 Census Population Top 100s Metro areas and agglomerations Population centres Municipalities Culture Architecture Art Cinema Cuisine Folklore People Holidays Identity Literature Music Nationalisms Online media Protectionism Sport Theatre Symbols Coat of arms Flags Provincial and territorial Royal Heraldic Article overviews Index Outline Topics Research Bibliography Historiography Book Category Portal WikiProject v t e Lists of flags Lists of flags State-related Arab states Civil flag Country Date of Adoption Historical flags State flag Mobile Air Forces Roundels Air Forces Fin Flashes Civil ensign Civil air ensign Other entities Country subdivisions Ethnic By design Color by number by combination Two-sided Aspect ratio By nations Argentina Armenia Australia Austria Azerbaijan Bahamas Bangladesh Barbados Belarus Belgium Bosnia & Herzegovina Brazil Cambodia Canada Chile China People's Republic of China Republic of China (Taiwan) Hong Kong Macau Colombia Costa Rica Croatia Denmark Dem. Rep. Congo Dominican Republic Egypt Estonia Finland France regions Germany Georgia Greece Haiti Hungary Iceland India Ireland Israel Iraq Italy Jamaica Japan Kazakhstan Kenya Korea North Korea South Korea Latvia Lithuania Luxembourg Macedonia Malaysia Mexico Malta Moldova Morocco Montenegro Netherlands New Zealand Norway Pakistan Peru Philippines Poland naval and maritime voivodeships Portugal Rhodesia Romania Russia federal subjects Russian Navy Serbia Kosovo Singapore South Africa Soviet Union republics Soviet Navy Spain Sri Lanka Sweden Switzerland Thailand Ukraine United Kingdom England Northern Ireland Scotland Wales Falkland Islands Gibraltar United States states Puerto Rico CSA Uzbekistan Vatican City Venezuela Vietnam Yugoslavia Zimbabwe By continent Africa Antarctica Asia Europe North America Oceania South America Names in italics indicate non-sovereign (dependent) territories, disputed states and/or former countries. Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=List_of_Canadian_flags&oldid=718923148" Categories: Lists and galleries of flags Flags of Canada Canada-related lists Hidden categories: Incomplete lists from September 2010 Commons category with local link same as on Wikidata Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Article Talk Variants Views Read Edit View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Featured content Current events Random article Donate to Wikipedia Wikipedia store Interaction Help About Wikipedia Community portal Recent changes Contact page Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Cite this page Print/export Create a book Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Languages Deutsch Français Galego 한국어 Italiano עברית Nederlands 日本語 Português ไทย Українська 粵語 中文 Edit links This page was last modified on 6 May 2016, at 13:18. Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view