Greater Victoria - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Greater Victoria From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia   (Redirected from Greater Victoria, British Columbia) Jump to: navigation, search Not to be confused with Greater Vitória. Greater Victoria Metropolitan area Downtown Victoria skyline Country  Canada Province  British Columbia Area (2011)[1]  • Total 696.15 km2 (268.79 sq mi) Population  (2011)[1]  • CMA 344,615  • CMA density 495.0/km2 (1,282/sq mi) Time zone PST (UTC-8)  • Summer (DST) PDT (UTC-7) Greater Victoria (also known as the Greater Victoria Region) is located in British Columbia, Canada, on the southern tip of Vancouver Island. It is a cultural rather than political entity, usually defined as the thirteen easternmost municipalities of the Capital Regional District (CRD) on Vancouver Island as well as some adjacent areas and nearby islands. The Capital Regional District administers some aspects of public administration for the whole metro region; other aspects are administered by the individual member municipalities of Greater Victoria. Roughly, Greater Victoria consists of all land and nearby islands east of an imaginary line drawn from the southern end of Finlayson Arm to the eastern shore of Sooke Harbour, along with some lands on the northern shore of Sooke Harbour. Many places, buildings, and institutions associated with Victoria (the University of Victoria, Victoria International Airport, or the Swartz Bay Ferry Terminal, for example), actually exist outside the City of Victoria. Victoria is the locality indicated in the mailing addresses of several CRD municipalities and localities adjacent to Victoria. The central city of Victoria lends its name and cultural influence to many places and organizations in the metro region. Contents 1 Municipalities 1.1 Neighbourhoods 2 Demographics 2.1 Ethnicity 3 Culture 4 Notable places 4.1 Educational institutions 4.2 Hospitals 4.3 Military installations 4.4 Parks and natural features 4.5 Scientific facilities 4.6 Sites of interest 4.6.1 Historical 4.6.2 Political 4.6.3 Cultural 4.6.4 Other 4.7 Sports facilities 4.8 Transportation and ports 5 Media outlets 5.1 Print 5.2 Social Media Communities 5.3 AM Radio 5.4 FM Radio 5.5 Television 6 Regional organisations 7 References Municipalities[edit] "Core" municipalities The City of Victoria and the District Municipalities of Saanich, Esquimalt, and Oak Bay, which are all adjacent to it. Western Communities The cities of Colwood and Langford, the town of View Royal, and the District Municipalities of Highlands, Metchosin, and Sooke, which lie generally west of Esquimalt Harbour and Portage Inlet. Saanich Peninsula The District Municipalities of Central Saanich, North Saanich, parts of Saanich, and the town of Sidney, which lie to the north of Victoria. This breakdown is roughly mirrored by the three school districts in Greater Victoria. Greater Victoria School District #61 - (the core municipalities) Sooke School District #62 - (the Western Communities) Saanich School District #63 - (the Saanich Peninsula) Greater Victoria is the southernmost urban area in Western Canada; it is located south of the 49th parallel. Neighbourhoods[edit] This list is similar to, but not identical with, that used by the Greater Victoria real estate sales industry. Neighbourhoods with official status are italicized. Others may have no official definition, hence other lists of neighbourhoods in the Victoria area may differ. Other sources may give different boundaries as well. Victoria[2] Burnside-Gorge Rock Bay Downtown Chinatown Fairfield-Gonzales Cook Street Village Humboldt Valley Gonzales Fernwood Harris Green Hillside-Quadra Blanshard Quadra Village Mayfair James Bay Jubilee North Jubilee South Jubilee North Park Oaklands Rockland Victoria West Saanich Blenkinsop Cadboro Bay Queenswood Ten Mile Point Carey Glanford Marigold Cordova Bay Gordon Head Arbutus Mt. Douglas North Quadra Quadra Cedar Hill Lake Hill Maplewood Royal Oak Broadmead-Sunnymead Rural Saanich Beaver Lake Elk Lake Interurban Prospect Lake Strawberry Vale West Burnside Saanich Core Shelbourne Mt. Tolmie Tillicum The Gorge Oak Bay Gonzales (Foul Bay) Uplands Willows Beach Windsor Park South Oak Bay North Oak Bay Estevan Esquimalt Craigflower Colville Road Gorge Vale Parklands Rockheights Saxe Point Songhees West Bay Work Point (DND) View Royal Shoreline Colwood Belmont Park Colwood Corners Hatley Park Mill Hill Royal Roads Triangle Mountain Langford Bear Mountain Florence Lake Glen Lake Goldstream Luxton Millstream Ravenwood Thetis Heights Westhills Highlands Durrance Lake Thetis Lake Willis Point Metchosin Happy Valley Matheson Lake Rocky Point William Head Central Saanich Brentwood Bay Island View Saanichton North Saanich Cloake Hill Dean Park Deep Cove Lands End Patricia Bay ("Pat Bay") Swartz Bay Ardmore Sidney Sooke Broom Hill East Sooke Otter Point Kemp Lake Sooke Town Centre Sunriver Saseenos Whiffin Spit Demographics[edit] The Greater Victoria region has a combined population of 359,991 according to the 2011 Canadian census.[3] The region comprises two of the fifteen most populous municipalities in British Columbia (Saanich, at number seven, and Victoria at number thirteen). The Canadian Census ranks Greater Victoria as the 15th largest metropolitan area in Canada, by population. The combined population of the cities, municipalities, unincorporated areas and Indian Reserves in the region are as follows: Saanich 109,752 Victoria 80,017 Langford 29,228 Oak Bay 18,015 Esquimalt 16,209 Colwood 16,093 Central Saanich 15,936 Sooke 11,435 Sidney 11,178 North Saanich 11,089 View Royal 9,381 Indian Reserves 5,436 (incl est of 250 for Esquimalt IR) Metchosin 4,803 Juan de Fuca Electoral Area 4351 (Part of CRD Electoral Area: E. Sooke to Jordan R. 4137, Jordon R. to Port Renfrew 178) Highlands 2,120 Ethnicity[edit] In comparison to the Lower Mainland (Vancouver and environs), the region does not have a great deal of racial diversity. Most of the population is of European descent. A substantial community of those of Chinese descent has existed in Greater Victoria since the Fraser Gold Rush of 1858-60, which saw the first significant influx, arriving first via San Francisco then directly from China. There is also a substantial First Nations (indigenous) population whose ancestors have lived in the area for thousands of years. Numerous First Nations reserves, forming distinct communities, exist in the region — primarily on the Saanich Peninsula, in Esquimalt, and in the Western Communities — although the majority of the First Nations population live off-reserve. The largest ethnic groups in Greater Victoria, according to the 2001 census, are: English - 131,670 Scottish - 79,275 Irish - 56,655 German - 34,345 French - 29,440 Dutch - 13,805 Ukrainian - 12,770 Chinese - 11,720 Aboriginal - 10,230 Culture[edit] Many Victoria Region municipalities have their own fairs: Oak Bay's Tea Party, Esquimalt's Buccaneer Days, Sidney's Sidney Days, Sooke's Sooke Days, Western Communities' Luxton Rodeo, and Central Saanich's Saanich Fair. The Saanich Fair is the oldest and largest of all the Greater Victoria local fair venues; it is considered a de facto regional fair because of its greater size, content, and famous reputation. The Saanich Fair has the largest number of attendees of all the Victoria area fairs. There is a wide variety of entertainment and recreational facilities and activities. The mild coastal climate ensures less extreme weather changes. Outdoor and indoor recreational areas are abundant throughout the region. The Rifflandia Music Festival takes place downtown in mid to late September. The Luminara Lantern Festival is a regionally popular cultural/artistic outdoor activity that draws thousands of visitors to Beacon Hill Park. The Victoria Tall Ships Festival showcase sailing vessels and the sailing life.[1] The Victoria Symphony performs over 100 concerts a year, including the renowned Symphony Splash, an annual free concert in the Inner Harbour on the August Sunday preceding B.C Day. The orchestra is on a barge playing to an audience of over 40,000. The Electronic Music Festival also takes place at Centennial Square, where DJs can show off their music mixing skills. These regional positive qualities, along with new transportation links, international high profile events (2007 NATO meeting, 2007 FIFA U-20 World Cup, 1994 Commonwealth Games), could have helped produce a socio-economic effect in terms of: attractiveness as a place of residency, low unemployment, high real estate development potential for profit, increasing immigration of new people(s), and expanding opportunities for business or economic development. High profile international attention performs its duty as a marketing, public relations, and sales catalyst for further activity. Boaters from around the world gather annually in the waters off of Vancouver Island for the Swiftsure International Yacht Race. An example of this economic opportunity also lies in Victoria's geography. The April 19, 2008 "Victoria Times Colonist" newspaper printed a section, sponsored by the Downtown Victoria Business Association/DVBA, focusing on the area's downtown selection of goods and service providers. As it was in the early days with merchants supplying and outfitting gold rush prospectors, today's modern merchants supply outdoor recreation seekers before they head to other parts of Vancouver Island for surfing, kayaking, hiking, camping, swimming, cycling or whatever activities they seek. In June 2010, the Canadian Navy celebrated its 100th anniversary with a Fleet Review in the waters off of Greater Victoria, by Canada's former Governor General Michaëlle Jean. The review was attended by warships from Canada, France, New Zealand, Australia, Japan, the United States along with US and Canadian Coast Guard vessels. These celebration activities coincided with the Esquimalt Buccaneer Days Fair and the 2010 FIFA World Cup activities in local bars. The 2010 Olympic Torch Relay started in Greater Victoria and proceeded to other communities across Canada. The conclusion of the torch relay began the 2010 Winter Olympics in Vancouver BC. Victoria's world famous Butchart Gardens are actually located in Central Saanich Notable places[edit] Educational institutions[edit] Camosun College (Saanich and Oak Bay) Lester B. Pearson College (Metchosin) Pacific Rim College (Victoria) Royal Roads University (Colwood) University of Victoria (Saanich and Oak Bay) University Canada West (Victoria campus closed 2011) Vancouver Island School of Art (Victoria) Victoria College of Art (Victoria) Hospitals[edit] Royal Jubilee Hospital (Victoria and Saanich) Saanich Peninsula Hospital (Central Saanich/Saanich Peninsula) Victoria General Hospital (View Royal) Military installations[edit] (Department of National Defence) CFB Esquimalt HMC Dockyard (Esquimalt) CFB Esquimalt Naden (Esquimalt) HMCS Malahat (Victoria) Bay Street Armoury (Victoria) Lieutenant General E.C. Ashton Armoury (Saanich) Victoria International Airport Air Force Squadron detachment (North Saanich) Parks and natural features[edit] Elk/Beaver Lake Regional Park (Saanich) East Sooke Regional Park (Juan de Fuca EA) Goldstream Provincial Park (Langford) Beacon Hill Park (Victoria) Francis/King Regional Park (Saanich) Galloping Goose Regional Trail (from Victoria west through Sooke) John Dean Provincial Park (North Saanich and Central Saanich) Gowlland Tod Provincial Park (Highlands, and Juan de Fuca EA) Mount Douglas Park (Saanich) Mount Work Regional Park (Saanich, Highlands, and Juan de Fuca EA) Sooke Potholes Regional Park, Sooke Potholes Provincial Park and Sooke River Provincial Park (Sooke) Swan Lake/Christmas Hill Nature Sanctuary (Saanich) Thetis Lake Regional Park (View Royal, Langford, and Highlands) Uplands Park (Oak Bay) Saxe Point Park/Fleming Beach, former military defence gun bunkers/observation (Esquimalt) Hartland landfill (mountain biking, tours & hiking) (Saanich) Mt. Tolmie (Saanich) Scientific facilities[edit] Dominion Astrophysical Observatory/National Research Council of Canada (Saanich) Gonzales Observatory for Atmospheric Biogeochemistry Research (Oak Bay) Institute of Ocean Sciences/Fisheries and Oceans Canada (North Saanich) Geological Survey of Canada, GSC Pacific/Natural Resources Canada (Sidney) Sites of interest[edit] <http://www.victoriabc.ca/> Historical[edit] Craigdarroch Castle (Victoria) Craigflower Manor and Craigflower Schoolhouse (Saanich) Empress Hotel (Victoria) Fort Rodd Hill and Fisgard Lighthouse / Parks Canada (Colwood) Hatley Park (Colwood) Ross Bay Cemetery (Victoria) Harling Point Chinese Cemetery (Oak Bay) Veteran's Cemetery (Esquimalt) Chinatown (Victoria) Fleming Beach, historical defence bunkers (Esquimalt) Emily Carr House (Victoria) Victoria High School (Victoria) Camosun College (Saanich) Beacon Hill Park (Victoria) Government House (Victoria) Legislature of British Columbia (Victoria) Helmcken House (Victoria) Victoria Police Department Station Museum (150 years of policing artifacts) (Victoria) Political[edit] Government House (Victoria) Parliament Buildings (Victoria) Victoria City Hall (Victoria) Cultural[edit] Art Gallery of Greater Victoria (Victoria) British Columbia Aviation Museum (Sidney) CFB Esquimalt Military Museum (Esquimalt) Chinatown (Victoria) Maltwood Art Gallery UVic University Centre (Saanich) Royal British Columbia Museum & IMAX National Geographic Theatre (Victoria) Shaw Ocean Discovery Centre (Sidney) Thunderbird Park (Victoria, British Columbia) Other[edit] Butchart Gardens (Central Saanich) Sports facilities[edit] Golf Bear Mountain Golf and Country Club (Langford) Cedar Hill Golf Course (Saanich) Gorge Vale Golf Club (Esquimalt) Olympic View Golf Club (Langford and Colwood) Royal Colwood Golf and Country Club (Colwood) Royal Oak Golf Club (Saanich) Uplands Golf Club (Oak Bay) Victoria Golf Club (Oak Bay) Highland Pacific Golf (Saanich) Prospect Lake Golf Course (Saanich) Cordova Bay Golf Course (Saanich) Other Gordon Head Recreation Centre (Saanich) Cedar Hill Recreation Centre (Saanich) Victoria City Rowing Club (Saanich) Crystal Pool (Victoria) George Pearkes Recreation Centre (Saanich) Juan de Fuca Recreation Centre (Colwood) Save-On-Foods Memorial Centre arena (Victoria) Royal Victoria Yacht Club (Oak Bay) Saanich Commonwealth Place (swimming pool and library-Greater Victoria Public Library) (Saanich) Victoria Curling Club (Victoria) Western Speedway (motor racing) (Langford) Bear Mountain Arena (Colwood) Royal Athletic Park (Victoria) Centennial Stadium (track & field) (Saanich, UVic) Esquimalt Recreation Centre (Esquimalt) Panorama Recreation Centre (North Saanich) Oak Bay Recreation Centre (Oak Bay) Eagle Ridge Community Centre (Langford) City Centre Park (Langford) Transportation and ports[edit] Black Ball Ferries (to Port Angeles, Washington) (Victoria) Esquimalt and Nanaimo Railway terminus (Victoria) Victoria Harbour (Victoria) Victoria Inner Harbour Airport Swartz Bay Ferry Terminal (BC Ferries to Tsawwassen, near Vancouver) (North Saanich) Victoria International Airport (North Saanich) Victoria Airport Water Aerodrome Washington State Ferries (Sidney, to the San Juan Islands and Anacortes) Downtown Victoria, Helijet helicopter service to Downtown Vancouver, (Victoria) Media outlets[edit] Print[edit] Victoria Times-Colonist, regional newspaper Monday Magazine, entertainment weekly publication The Nexus, Camosun College student newspaper The Martlet, University of Victoria student newspaper Black Press community newspapers LookOut, newspaper of CFB Esquimalt Navy Base Victoria Marketplace, monthly business profiles Douglas Magazine, Victoria based business magazine Social Media Communities[edit] Victoria Buzz AM Radio[edit] CKMO 900 kHz CFAX 1070 kHz FM Radio[edit] CBUX, Espace musique - 88.9 CBCV, CBC Radio One - 90.5 MHz CJZN 91.3 MHz - "The Zone @ 91-3" CBU, CBC Radio 2 - 92.1 MHz CIOC 98.5 MHz - "The Ocean" CKKQ 100.3 MHz - "100.3 The Q!" CFUV 101.9 MHz - CFUV, University of Victoria CHTT 103.1 MHz - "Kiss FM" CHBE 107.3 MHz - "Kool FM" Television[edit] Channel 6: CHEK (Independent) Cable 11: SHAW (Shaw TV) Channel 53, Cable 12: CIVI (A), currently CTV News Regional organisations[edit] Greater Victoria Chamber of Commerce Greater Victoria Film Commission Greater Victoria Art Gallery Greater Victoria Cycling Coalition Greater Victoria Public Library References[edit] ^ a b "Population and dwelling counts, for census metropolitan areas, 2011 and 2006 censuses". Statistics Canada. 2012-02-08. Retrieved 2012-02-13.  ^ Neighbourhoods | Victoria. Victoria.ca (2012-10-04). Retrieved on 2013-07-12. ^ Census Profile. 2.statcan.ca. Retrieved on 2013-07-12. v t e Communities on Vancouver Island Ahousat Bamberton Bamfield Black Creek Bowser Brentwood Bay Buckley Bay Campbell River Cassidy Cedar Central Saanich Chemainus Clo-oose Coal Harbour Cobble Hill Colwood Comox Coombs Courtenay Cowichan Bay Cowichan Station Crofton Cumberland Deep Bay Duncan Errington Esquimalt Fanny Bay French Creek Genoa Bay Gold River Harewood Highlands Holberg Honeymoon Bay Kildonan Koksilah Ladysmith Lake Cowichan Langford Lantzville Malahat Maple Bay Merville Mesachie Lake Metchosin Mill Bay Nanaimo Nanoose Bay Nitinat North Cowichan North Saanich Oak Bay Oceanside Oyster River Parksville Port Alberni Port Alice Port Hardy Port McNeill Port Renfrew Qualicum Beach Quatsino River Jordan Royston Saanich Saanichton Saltair Sayward Sechart Shawnigan Lake Sidney Sooke Tahsis Telegraph Cove Tofino Ucluelet Union Bay Greater Victoria Victoria View Royal Westholme Winter Harbour Woss Youbou Yuquot (Friendly Cove) Zeballos v t e Members of the Capital Regional District Municipalities Central Saanich Colwood Esquimalt Highlands Langford Metchosin North Saanich Oak Bay Saanich Sidney Sooke Victoria View Royal Electoral areas B & D (Juan de Fuca) F (Salt Spring Island) G (Southern Gulf Islands) v t e Neighbourhoods in Greater Victoria, British Columbia Victoria Chinatown Cook Street Village Downtown East Burnside–Gorge Fairfield Fernwood Harris Green Hillside Humboldt Valley James Bay Jubilee North Park Rock Bay Rockland Victoria West Saanich Beaver Lake – Elk Lake Broadmead–Sunnymead Cadboro Bay Cedar Hill Cloverdale Cordova Bay Glanford Gordon Head Gorge–Tillicum, Interurban Lake Hill Maplewood Marigold Mount Douglas Mount Tolmie – Lansdowne Prospect Lake Royal Oak Saanichton Strawberry Vale Swan Lake Ten Mile Point Town and Country – Burnside West Saanich West Shore Bear Mountain Belmont Park Colwood Glen Lake Goldstream Happy Valley Hatley Park Langford Luxton Mill Hill Millstream Thetis Lake Other areas Brentwood Bay Broom Hill Cloak Hill Craigflower Dean Park Deep Cove Durrance Lake East Sooke Florence Lake Gonzales Gorge Vale Island View Kemp Lake Lands End Matheson Lake Otter Point Pat Bay Ravenwood Rockheights Rocky Point Saseenos Songhees Sooke Swartz Bay Uplands Whiffen Spit William Head Willis Point Willows Beach Windsor Park Work Point v t e Census metropolitan areas (CMAs) in Canada by size Toronto, ON Montreal, QC Vancouver, BC Calgary, AB Ottawa Edmonton, AB Quebec City, QC Winnipeg, MB Hamilton, ON Kitchener-Cambridge-Waterloo, ON London, ON St. Catharines-Niagara, ON Halifax, NS Oshawa, ON Victoria, BC Windsor, ON Saskatoon, SK Regina, SK Sherbrooke, QC St. John's, NL Barrie, ON Kelowna, BC Abbotsford, BC Greater Sudbury, ON Kingston, ON Saguenay, QC Trois-Rivières, QC Guelph, ON Moncton, NB Brantford, ON Thunder Bay, ON Saint John, NB Peterborough, ON Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Greater_Victoria&oldid=713783694" Categories: Southern Vancouver Island Greater Victoria Capital Regional District Metropolitan areas of British Columbia Populated coastal places in Canada Hidden categories: Use Canadian English from March 2015 All Wikipedia articles written in Canadian English Use mdy dates from March 2015 British Columbia articles missing geocoordinate data All articles needing coordinates Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Article Talk Variants Views Read Edit View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Featured content Current events Random article Donate to Wikipedia Wikipedia store Interaction Help About Wikipedia Community portal Recent changes Contact page Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Cite this page Print/export Create a book Download as PDF Printable version Languages Español Esperanto اردو Edit links This page was last modified on 5 April 2016, at 21:39. Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view