Portuguese language - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Portuguese language From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to: navigation, search Portuguese português Pronunciation [puɾtuˈɣeʃ], [poʁtuˈɡes] Native to Originally Portugal, now worldwide (See below) Region Africa, Asia, Europe, South America Native speakers 215 million (2010)[1] Total (L1 plus L2): 250 million (2012)[2] Language family Indo-European Italic Romance Western Romance Ibero-Romance West Iberian Galician-Portuguese Portuguese Early forms Medieval Galician Portuguese Writing system Latin (Portuguese alphabet) Portuguese Braille Signed forms Manually coded Portuguese Official status Official language in 9 countries Angola Brazil Cabo Verde East Timor Equatorial Guinea Guinea-Bissau Mozambique Portugal São Tomé and Príncipe 1 dependency Macau 1 autonomous region Galicia (disputed)[3] Cultural language India (Goa) Numerous international organisations Regulated by International Portuguese Language Institute Academia Brasileira de Letras (Brazil) Academia das Ciências de Lisboa, Classe de Letras (Portugal) CPLP Language codes ISO 639-1 pt ISO 639-2 por ISO 639-3 por Glottolog port1283[4] Linguasphere 51-AAA-a   Native language   Official and administrative language   Cultural or secondary language   Portuguese speaking minorities   Portuguese-based creole languages This article contains IPA phonetic symbols. Without proper rendering support, you may see question marks, boxes, or other symbols instead of Unicode characters. Portuguese (português or, in full, língua portuguesa) is a Romance language and the sole official language of Angola, Brazil, Cape Verde, Guinea-Bissau, Mozambique, Portugal, and São Tomé and Príncipe.[5] It also has co-official language status in East Timor, Equatorial Guinea, and Macau. As the result of expansion during colonial times, a cultural presence of Portuguese and Portuguese creole speakers are also found in Goa, Daman and Diu in India;[6] in Batticaloa on the east coast of Sri Lanka; in the Indonesian island of Flores; and in Malacca in Malaysia. Portuguese is a part of the Ibero-Romance group that evolved from several dialects of Vulgar Latin in the medieval Kingdom of Galicia. With approximately 215 to 220 million native speakers and 260 million total speakers, Portuguese is usually listed as the sixth most natively spoken language in the world, the third-most spoken European language in the world in terms of native speakers,[7] and a major language of the Southern Hemisphere. It is also the most spoken language in South America and the second-most spoken in Latin America after Spanish, and is an official language of the European Union, Mercosul and the African Union. Spanish author Miguel de Cervantes once called Portuguese "the sweet and gracious language" and Spanish playwright Lope de Vega referred to it as "sweet", while the Brazilian writer Olavo Bilac poetically described it as "a última flor do Lácio, inculta e bela" (the last flower of Latium, rustic and beautiful). Portuguese is also termed "the language of Camões", after one of the greatest literary figures in the Portuguese language, Luís Vaz de Camões.[8][9][10] In March 2006, the Museum of the Portuguese Language, an interactive museum about the Portuguese language, was founded in São Paulo, Brazil, the city with the greatest number of Portuguese language speakers in the world.[11] The museum is the first of its kind in the world.[11] In 2015 the museum was destroyed in a fire, but there are plans to reconstruct it.[12] Contents 1 History 2 Geographic distribution 2.1 Official status 2.2 Population of countries and jurisdictions of Portuguese official or co-official language 2.3 Portuguese as a foreign language 2.4 Future 3 Dialects 3.1 Brazil 3.2 Portugal 3.3 Other countries and dependencies 3.4 Characterization and peculiarities 4 Vocabulary 5 Classification and related languages 5.1 Galician-Portuguese in Spain 5.2 Influence on other languages 5.3 Derived languages 6 Phonology 6.1 Vowels 6.2 Consonants 7 Grammar 8 Writing system 8.1 Spelling reforms 9 See also 10 References 10.1 Literature 10.2 Phonology, orthography and grammar 10.3 Reference dictionaries 10.4 Linguistic studies 11 External links History[edit] Main article: History of the Portuguese language When the Romans arrived in the Iberian Peninsula in 216 BCE, they brought the Latin language with them, from which all Romance languages descend. The language was spread by Roman soldiers, settlers, and merchants, who built Roman cities mostly near the settlements of previous Celtic or Celtiberian civilizations established long before the Roman arrivals. Between 409 CE and 711 CE, as the Roman Empire collapsed in Western Europe, the Iberian Peninsula was conquered by Germanic peoples (Migration Period). The occupiers, mainly Suebi and Visigoths who originally spoke Germanic languages, quickly adopted late Roman culture and the Vulgar Latin dialects of the peninsula and over the next 300 years totally integrated in the local populations. After the Moorish invasion of 711 CE, Arabic became the administrative and common language in the conquered regions, but most of the remaining Christian population continued to speak a form of Romance commonly known as Mozarabic which lasted three centuries longer in Spain. Portuguese evolved from the medieval language, known today by linguists as Galician-Portuguese or Old Portuguese or Old Galician, of the northwestern medieval Kingdom of Galicia, the first among the Christian kingdoms after the start of the Reconquista of the Iberian Peninsula. It is in Latin administrative documents of the 9th century that written Galician-Portuguese words and phrases are first recorded. This phase is known as Proto-Portuguese, which lasted from the 9th century until the 12th-century independence of the County of Portugal from the Kingdom of León, by then reigning over Galicia.[13] In the first part of the Galician-Portuguese period (from the 12th to the 14th century), the language was increasingly used for documents and other written forms. For some time, it was the language of preference for lyric poetry in Christian Hispania, much as Occitan was the language of the poetry of the troubadours in France. Portugal became an independent kingdom in 1139, under King Afonso I of Portugal. In 1290, King Denis of Portugal created the first Portuguese university in Lisbon (the Estudos Gerais, later moved to Coimbra) and decreed that Portuguese, then simply called the "common language", be known as the Portuguese language and used officially. In the second period of Old Portuguese, in the 15th and 16th centuries, with the Portuguese discoveries, the language was taken to many regions of Africa, Asia and the Americas. By the mid-16th century, Portuguese had become a lingua franca in Asia and Africa, used not only for colonial administration and trade but also for communication between local officials and Europeans of all nationalities. Its spread was helped by mixed marriages between Portuguese and local people, and by its association with Roman Catholic missionary efforts, which led to the formation of creole languages such as that called Kristang in many parts of Asia (from the word cristão, "Christian"). The language continued to be popular in parts of Asia until the 19th century. Some Portuguese-speaking Christian communities in India, Sri Lanka, Malaysia, and Indonesia preserved their language even after they were isolated from Portugal. The end of the Old Portuguese period was marked by the publication of the Cancioneiro Geral by Garcia de Resende, in 1516. The early times of Modern Portuguese, which spans the period from the 16th century to the present day, were characterized by an increase in the number of learned words borrowed from Classical Latin and Classical Greek due to the Renaissance, which greatly enriched the lexicon. Geographic distribution[edit] Multilingual sign in Japanese, Portuguese, and English in Oizumi, Japan. Return immigration of Japanese Brazilians has led to a large Portuguese-speaking community in the town.[14] Main article: Geographic distribution of Portuguese Portuguese is the language of the majority of people in Brazil[15] and Portugal,[16] and 99.8% of the population of São Tomé and Príncipe declared speaking Portuguese in the 1991 census.[citation needed] Perhaps 75% of the population of Angola speaks Portuguese natively,[17] and 85% are fluent.[18] Just over 40% of the population of Mozambique are native speakers of Portuguese, and 60% are fluent, according to the 2007 census.[19] Portuguese is also spoken natively by 30% of the population in Guinea-Bissau, and a Portuguese-based creole is understood by all.[20] No data is available for Cape Verde, but almost all the population is bilingual, and the monolingual population speaks Cape Verdean Creole. There are also significant Portuguese speaking immigrant communities in many countries including Andorra (15.4%),[21] Bermuda,[22] Canada (0.72% or 219,275 people in the 2006 census),[23] France (500,000 people),[24] Japan (400,000 people),[25] Jersey,[26] Namibia (about 4–5% of the population, mainly refugees from Angola in the North of the country),[27] Paraguay (10.7% or 636,000 people),[28] Macau (0.6% or 12,000 people),[29] Switzerland (196,000 nationals in 2008),[30] Venezuela (254,000).[31] and the USA (0.35% of the population or 1,228,126 speakers according to the 2007 American Community Survey),[32] In some parts of former Portuguese India, namely Goa[33] and Daman and Diu,[34] the language is still spoken by about 10,000 people. In 2014, an estimated 1,500 students were learning Portuguese in Goa.[35] Official status[edit] Main article: List of countries where Portuguese is an official language Countries and regions where Portuguese has official status. The Community of Portuguese Language Countries[5] (in Portuguese Comunidade dos Países de Língua Portuguesa, with the Portuguese acronym CPLP) consists of the eight independent countries that have Portuguese as an official language: Angola, Brazil, Cape Verde, East Timor, Guinea-Bissau, Mozambique, Portugal and São Tomé and Príncipe.[5] Equatorial Guinea made a formal application for full membership to the CPLP in June 2010 and would be required to add Portuguese as its third official language (alongside Spanish and French), as required by the CPLP for membership. The President of Equatorial Guinea, Obiang Nguema Mbasog, and Prime Minister Ignacio Milam Tang approved on 20 July 2011 a new Constitutional bill that intends to add Portuguese as an official language of the country. As of 23 July 2012, the bill is still awaiting ratification by the People's Representative Chamber and it shall come into force 20 days after its publication at the official state's gazette.[36][37][38] Portuguese is also one of the official languages of the Special Administrative Region of the People's Republic of China of Macau (alongside Chinese) and of several international organizations, including the Mercosur,[39] the Organization of Ibero-American States,[40] the Union of South American Nations,[41] the Organization of American States,[42] the African Union[43] and the European Union.[44] Population of countries and jurisdictions of Portuguese official or co-official language[edit] According to The World Factbook country population estimates for 2013, the population of each of the nine jurisdictions is as follows (by descending order): Country Population (2014 est.)[45]  Brazil 202,656,788  Mozambique 24,692,144  Angola 24,383,301  Portugal 10,813,834  Guinea-Bissau 1,693,398  East Timor 1,201,542  Macau 587,914  Cape Verde 538,535  São Tomé and Príncipe 190,428 Total 262,184,943 This means that the population living in the Lusophone official area is of 261,976,607 inhabitants. This number does not include the Lusophone diaspora, estimated at approximately 10 million people (including 4.5 million Portuguese, 3 million Brazilians, and half a million Cape Verdeans, among others), although it is hard to obtain official accurate numbers of diasporic Portuguese speakers because a significant portion of these citizens are naturalized citizens born outside of Lusophone territory or are children of immigrants, and may have only a basic command of the language. It is also important to note that a large part of the diaspora is a part of the already-counted population of the Portuguese-speaking countries and territories, such as the high number of Brazilian and PALOP emigrant citizens in Portugal or the high number of Portuguese emigrant citizens in the PALOP and Brazil. The Portuguese language therefore serves more than 250 million people daily, who have direct or indirect legal, juridical and social contact with it, varying from the only language used in any contact, to only education, contact with local or international administration, commerce and services or the simple sight of road signs, public information and advertising in Portuguese. Portuguese as a foreign language[edit] The mandatory offering of Portuguese language in school curricula is observed in Uruguay[46] and Argentina.[47] Other countries where Portuguese is taught at schools or is being introduced now include Venezuela,[48] Zambia,[49] the Republic of the Congo,[50] Senegal,[50] Namibia,[27] Swaziland,[50] and South Africa.[50] Future[edit] According to estimates by UNESCO, Portuguese is the fastest-growing European language after English and the language has, according to the newspaper The Portugal News publishing data given from UNESCO, the highest potential for growth as an international language in southern Africa and South America.[51] The Portuguese-speaking African countries are expected to have a combined population of 83 million, and Brazil 350 million by 2050. In total, the Portuguese-speaking countries will have about 433[52] million people by the same year.[51] Portuguese is truly a globalized language spoken officially in 5 continents, and as a second language by millions worldwide. Since 1991, when Brazil signed into the economic community of Mercosul with other South American nations, such as Argentina, Uruguay, Paraguay and Venezuela, Portuguese is either mandatory, or taught, in the schools of those South American countries. Although early in the 21st century, after Macau was ceded to China and Brazilian immigration to Japan slowed down, the use of Portuguese was in decline in Asia, it is once again becoming a language of opportunity there, mostly because of increased diplomatic and financial ties with Portuguese-speaking countries in China,[53] but also some interest in their cultures, mainly Koreans and Japanese about Brazil. Presently China is doing a great amount of trade with all of the Portuguese speaking countries, and the Chinese themselves are learning Portuguese. These factors bode very well for the continued growth of Portuguese as an important economic, international language. Dialects[edit] Main article: Portuguese dialects Main article: Portuguese in the Americas The use of second person pronouns in the Lusosphere Much ethnically diverse East Timor has officialized Portuguese as one of its languages Você is used for educated, formal and colloquial respectful speech in all Portuguese-speaking regions, apart from the Brazilian state of Rio Grande do Sul, where it's virtually absent from the spoken language. Riograndense (or Gaúcho) Portuguese normally distinguishes formal from informal speech by verbal conjugation. Informal speech employs "tu" followed by third person verbs, formal language retains the traditional second person. Conjugation of tu has three different forms in Brazil (verb "to see": "tu viste?", in the traditional second person, "tu viu?", in the third person, and "tu visse?", in the innovative second person), the conjugation used in the Brazilian states of Pará, Santa Catarina and Maranhão being generally traditional second person, the kind that is used in other Portuguese-speaking countries and learned in Brazilian schools. The predominance of Southeastern-based media products has established "você" as the pronoun of choice for the second person singular in both writing and multimedia communications. However, in the city of Rio de Janeiro, the country's main cultural centre, the usage of "tu" has been expanding ever since the end of the 20th century (see [7], a linguistic research on the topic in Portuguese), being most frequent among youngsters and a number of studies have also shown an increase in its use in a number of other Brazilian dialects [8][9]. The status of second person pronouns in Brazil. Red indicates near exclusive use of "você". Mauve indicates decidedly predominant use of "tu", but with near exclusive third person ("você"-like) verbal conjugation. Brown indicates 50-50 tu/você variation, being "tu" nearly always accompanied by third person ("você"-like) verbal conjugation. Light blue indicates decidedly predominant to near exclusive use of "tu" with reasonable frequency of second person ("tu"-like) verbal conjugation. Yellow indicates balanced você/tu distribution, being "tu" exclusively accompanied by third person ("você"-like) verbal conjugation. Green indicates balanced você/tu distribution, "tu" being predominantly accompanied by third person ("você"-like) verbal conjugation. Modern Standard European Portuguese (português padrão or português continental) is based on the Portuguese spoken in the area including and surrounding the cities of Coimbra and Lisbon, in central Portugal, while modern Standard Brazilian Portuguese (português neutro) is based on the Portuguese spoken in the area including and surrounding the city of Rio de Janeiro, in southeastern Brazil,[54][55] which if vanished from its stereotypical traits i.e. its strong European flavor in phonology and prosody, is linguistically a halfway between Brazilian dialects and accents. Standard European Portuguese is also the preferred standard by the Portuguese-speaking African countries. As such, and despite the fact that its speakers are dispersed around the world, Portuguese has only two dialects used for learning: the European and the Brazilian. Some aspects and sounds found in many dialects of Brazil are exclusive to South America, and cannot be found in Europe. However, the Santomean Portuguese in Africa may be confused with a Brazilian dialect by its phonology and prosody. Audio samples of some dialects and accents of Portuguese are available below.[56] There are some differences between the areas but these are the best approximations possible. IPA transcriptions refer to the names in local pronunciation. Brazil[edit] Caipira — Spoken in the states of São Paulo (most markedly on the countryside and rural areas); southern Minas Gerais, northern Paraná and southeastern Mato Grosso do Sul. Depending on the vision of what constitutes caipira, Triângulo Mineiro, border areas of Goiás and the remaining parts of Mato Grosso do Sul are included, and the frontier of caipira in Minas Gerais is expanded further northerly, though not reaching metropolitan Belo Horizonte. It is often said that caipira appeared by decreolization of the língua brasílica and the related língua geral paulista, then spoken in almost all of what is now São Paulo, a former lingua franca in most of the contemporary Centro-Sul of Brazil before the 18th century, brought by the bandeirantes, interior pioneers of Colonial Brazil, closely related to its northern counterpart Nheengatu, and that is why the dialect shows many general differences from other variants of the language.[57] It has striking remarkable differences in comparison to other Brazilian dialects in phonology, prosody and grammar, often stigmatized as being strongly associated with a substandard variant, now mostly rural.[58][59][60][61][62] Cearense or costa norte ;— is a dialect spoken more sharply in the states of Ceará and Piauí. The variant of Ceará includes fairly distinctive traits it shares with the one spoken in Piauí, though, such as distinctive regional phonology and vocabulary (for example, a debuccalization process stronger than that of Portuguese, a different system of the vowel harmony that spans Brazil from fluminense and mineiro to amazofonia but is especially prevalent in nordestino, a very coherent coda sibilant palatalization as those of Portugal and Rio de Janeiro but allowed in fewer environments than in other accents of nordestino, a greater presence of dental stop palatalization to palato-alveolar in comparison to other accents of nordestino, among others, as well as a great number of archaic Portuguese words).[63][64][65][66][67][68] Baiano — Found in Bahia, Sergipe, northern Minas Gerais and border regions with Goiás and Tocantins. Similar to nordestino, it has a very characteristic syllable-timed rhythm and the greatest tendency to pronounce unstressed vowels as open-mid [ɛ] and [ɔ]. Variants and sociolects of Brazilian Portuguese. Fluminense — A broad dialect with many variants spoken in the states of Rio de Janeiro, Espírito Santo and neighbouring eastern regions of Minas Gerais. Fluminense formed in these previously caipira-speaking areas due to the gradual influence of European migrants, causing many people to distance their speech from their original dialect and incorporate new terms.[69] Fluminense is sometimes referred to as carioca, however carioca is a more specific term referring to the accent of the Greater Rio de Janeiro area by speakers with a fluminense dialect. Gaúcho — in Rio Grande do Sul, similar to sulista. There are many distinct accents in Rio Grande do Sul, mainly due to the heavy influx of European immigrants of diverse origins who have settled in colonies throughout the state, and to the proximity to Spanish-speaking nations. The gaúcho word in itself is a Spanish loanword into Portuguese of obscure Indigenous Amerindian origins. Percentage of worldwide Portuguese speakers per country. Mineiro — Minas Gerais (not prevalent in the Triângulo Mineiro). As the fluminense area, its associated region was formerly a sparsely populated land where caipira was spoken, but the discovery of gold and gems made it the most prosperous Brazilian region, what attracted Portuguese colonists, commoners from other parts of Brazil and their African slaves. South-southwestern, southeastern and northern areas of the state have fairly distinctive speech, actually approximating to caipira, fluminense (popularly called, often pejoratively, carioca do brejo, "marsh carioca") and baiano respectively. Areas including and surrounding Belo Horizonte have a distinctive accent. Nordestino[70] — more marked in the Sertão (7), where, in the 19th and 20th centuries and especially in the area including and surrounding the sertão (the dry land after Agreste) of Pernambuco and southern Ceará, it could sound less comprehensible to speakers of other Portuguese dialects than Galician or Rioplatense Spanish, and nowadays less distinctive from other variants in the metropolitan cities along the coasts. It can be divided in two regional variants, one that includes the northern Maranhão and southern of Piauí, and other that goes from Ceará to Alagoas. Nortista or amazofonia — Most of Amazon Basin states i.e. Northern Brazil. Before the 20th century, most people from the nordestino area fleeing the droughts and their associated poverty settled here, so it has some similarities with the Portuguese dialect there spoken. The speech in and around the city of Belém has a more European flavor in phonology, prosody and grammar. Paulistano — Variants spoken around Greater São Paulo in its maximum definition and more easterly areas of São Paulo state, as well perhaps "educated speech" from anywhere in the state of São Paulo (where it coexists with caipira). Caipira is the hinterland sociolect of much of the Central-Southern half of Brazil, nowadays conservative only in the rural areas and associated with them, that has a historically low prestige in cities as Rio de Janeiro, Curitiba, Belo Horizonte, and until some years ago, in São Paulo itself. Sociolinguistics, or what by times is described as 'linguistic prejudice', often correlated with classism,[71][72][73] is a polemic topic in the entirety of the country since the times of Adoniran Barbosa. Also, the "Paulistano" accent was heavily influenced by the presence of immigrants in the city of São Paulo, especially the Italians. Sertanejo — Center-Western states, and also much of Tocantins and Rondônia. It is closer to mineiro, caipira, nordestino or nortista depending on the location. Sulista — The variants spoken in the areas between the northern regions of Rio Grande do Sul and southern regions of São Paulo state, encompassing most of southern Brazil. The city of Curitiba does have a fairly distinct accent as well, and a relative majority of speakers around and in Florianópolis also speak this variant (many speak florianopolitano or manezinho da ilha instead, related to the European Portuguese dialects spoken in Azores and Madeira). Speech of northern Paraná is closer to that of inland São Paulo. Florianopolitano — Variants heavily influenced by European Portuguese spoken in Florianópolis city (due to a heavy immigration movement from Portugal, mainly its insular regions) and much of its metropolitan area, Grande Florianópolis, said to be a continuum between those whose speech most resemble sulista dialects and those whose speech most resemble fluminense and European ones, called, often pejoratively, manezinho da ilha. Carioca — Not a dialect, but sociolects of the fluminense variant spoken in an area roughly corresponding to Greater Rio de Janeiro. It appeared after locals came in contact with the Portuguese aristocracy amidst the Portuguese royal family fled in the early 19th century. There is actually a continuum between Vernacular countryside accents and the carioca sociolect, and the educated speech (in Portuguese norma culta, which most closely resembles other Brazilian Portuguese standards but with marked recent Portuguese influences, the nearest ones among the country's dialects along florianopolitano), so that not all people native to the state of Rio de Janeiro speak the said sociolect, but most carioca speakers will use the standard variant not influenced by it that is rather uniform around Brazil depending on context (emphasis or formality, for example). Brasiliense — used in Brasília and its metropolitan area.[74] It is not considered a dialect, but more of a regional variant – often deemed to be closer to fluminense than the dialect commonly spoken in most of Goiás, sertanejo. Arco do desflorestamento or serra amazônica — Known in its region as the "accent of the migrants", it has similarities with caipira, sertanejo and often sulista that make it differing from amazofonia (in the opposite group of Brazilian dialects, in which it is placed along nordestino, baiano, mineiro and fluminense). It is the most recent dialect, which appeared by the settlement of families from various other Brazilian regions attracted by the cheap land offer in recently deforested areas.[75][76] Recifense — used in Recife and its metropolitan area. Portugal[edit] Dialects of Portuguese in Portugal Micaelense (Açores) (São Miguel)—Azores. Alentejano—Alentejo (Alentejan Portuguese) Algarvio—Algarve (there is a particular dialect in a small part of western Algarve). Alto-Minhoto—North of Braga (hinterland). Baixo-Beirão; Alto-Alentejano—Central Portugal (hinterland). Beirão— Central Portugal. Estremenho—Regions of Coimbra, Leiria and Lisbon (this is a disputed denomination, as Coimbra is not part of "Estremadura", and the Lisbon dialect has some peculiar features that not only are not shared with the one of Coimbra, but also are significantly distinct and recognizable to most native speakers from elsewhere in Portugal). Madeirense (Madeiran)—Madeira. Nortenho—Regions of the districts of Braga, Porto and parts of Aveiro. Transmontano—Trás-os-Montes e Alto Douro. Other countries and dependencies[edit]  Angola— Angolano (Angolan Portuguese)  Cape Verde— Português cabo-verdiano (Cape Verdean Portuguese)  East Timor— Timorense (East Timorese Portuguese)  India — Damaense (Damanese Portuguese) and Goês (Goan Portuguese)  Guinea-Bissau— Guineense (Guinean Portuguese)  Macau— Macaense (Macanese Portuguese)  Mozambique— Moçambicano (Mozambican Portuguese)  São Tomé and Príncipe— Santomense (São Tomean Portuguese)  Spain—Oliventian Portuguese and other varieties sometimes controversially deemed as separate languages, such as Galician and Fala.  Uruguay—Dialectos Portugueses del Uruguay (DPU) Differences between dialects are mostly of accent and vocabulary, but between the Brazilian dialects and other dialects, especially in their most colloquial forms, there can also be some grammatical differences. The Portuguese-based creoles spoken in various parts of Africa, Asia, and the Americas are independent languages. Characterization and peculiarities[edit] Portuguese, like Catalan and Sardinian, preserved the stressed vowels of Vulgar Latin, which became diphthongs in most other Romance languages; cf. Port., Cat., Sard. pedra ; Fr. pierre, Sp. piedra, It. pietra, Ro. piatră, from Lat. petra ("stone"); or Port. fogo, Cat. foc, Sard. fogu; Sp. fuego, It. fuoco, Fr. feu, Ro. foc, from Lat. focus ("fire"). Another characteristic of early Portuguese was the loss of intervocalic l and n, sometimes followed by the merger of the two surrounding vowels, or by the insertion of an epenthetic vowel between them: cf. Lat. salire ("to jump"), tenere ("to hold"), catena ("chain"), Sp. salir, tener, cadena, Port. sair, ter, cadeia. When the elided consonant was n, it often nasalized the preceding vowel: cf. Lat. manum ("hand"), ranam ("frog"), bonum ("good"), Port. mão, rãa, bõo (now mão, rã, bom). This process was the source of most of the language's distinctive nasal diphthongs. In particular, the Latin endings -anem, -anum and -onem became -ão in most cases, cf. Lat. canis ("dog"), germanus ("brother"), ratio ("reason") with Modern Port. cão, irmão, razão, and their plurals -anes, -anos, -ones normally became -ães, -ãos, -ões, cf. cães, irmãos, razões. The Portuguese language is also the only Romance language that developed the clitic case mesoclisis: cf. dar-te-ei (I'll give thee), amar-te-ei (I'll love you), contactá-los-ei (I'll contact them). It was also the only Romance language to develop the "syntactic pluperfect past tense": cf. eu estivera (I had been), eu vivera (I had lived), vós vivêreis (you had lived). These happen in some of the Slavic languages, Hungarian and Japanese only. Vocabulary[edit] Main article: Portuguese vocabulary Library of the Mafra National Palace, Portugal Baroque Library of the Coimbra University, Portugal A sign in the Museum of Macau Most of the lexicon of Portuguese is derived, directly or through other Romance languages, from Latin. Nevertheless, because of its original Celtiberian heritage and later the participation of Portugal in the Age of Discovery, it has some Gallaecian words and adopted loanwords from all over the world. A number of Portuguese words can still be traced to the pre-Roman inhabitants of Portugal, which included the Gallaeci, Lusitanians, Celtici and Cynetes. Most of these words derived from Celtic and are very often shared with Galician since both languages share a common origin in the medieval language of Galician-Portuguese. A few of these words existed in Latin as loanwords from a Celtic source, often Gaulish. Altogether these are about 700 words, a few verbs and toponymic names of towns, rivers, utensils and plants. In the 5th century, the Iberian Peninsula (the Roman Hispania) was conquered by the Germanic Suebi and Visigoths. As they adopted the Roman civilization and language, however, these people contributed with some 500 Germanic words to the lexicon. Many of these words are related to warfare—such as espora "spur", estaca "stake", and guerra "war", from Gothic *spaúra, *stakka, and *wirro, respectively. The Germanic languages influence also exists in toponymic surnames and patronymic surnames borne by Visigoth sovereigns and their descendants, and it dwells on placenames such has Ermesinde, Esposende and Resende where sinde and sende are derived from the Germanic "sinths" (military expedition) and in the case of Resende, the prefix re comes from Germanic "reths" (council). Other examples of Portuguese names, surnames and town names of Germanic toponymic origin include Henrique, Henriques, Vermoim, Mandim, Calquim, Baguim, Gemunde, Guetim, Sermonde and many more, are quite common mainly in the old Suebi and later Visigothic dominated regions, covering today's Northern half of Portugal and Galicia. Between the 9th and early 13th centuries, Portuguese acquired about 800 words from Arabic by influence of Moorish Iberia.They are often recognizable by the initial Arabic article a(l)-, and include many common words such as aldeia "village" from الضيعة alḍai`a (or from Edictum Rothari: aldii, aldias),[77] alface "lettuce" from الخس alkhass, armazém "warehouse" from المخزن almakhzan, and azeite "olive oil" from الزيت azzait. Starting in the 15th century, the Portuguese maritime explorations led to the introduction of many loanwords from Asian languages. For instance, catana "cutlass" from Japanese katana and chá "tea" from Chinese chá. From South America came batata "potato", from Taino; ananás and abacaxi, from Tupi–Guarani naná and Tupi ibá cati, respectively (two species of pineapple), and pipoca "popcorn" from Tupi and tucano "toucan" from Guarani tucan. From the 16th to the 19th centuries, because of the role of Portugal as intermediary in the Atlantic slave trade, and the establishment of large Portuguese colonies in Angola, Mozambique, and Brazil, Portuguese acquired several words of African and Amerind origin, especially names for most of the animals and plants found in those territories. While those terms are mostly used in the former colonies, many became current in European Portuguese as well. From Kimbundu, for example, came kifumate > cafuné "head caress" (Brazil), kusula > caçula "youngest child" (Brazil), marimbondo "tropical wasp" (Brazil), and kubungula > bungular "to dance like a wizard" (Angola). Finally, it has received a steady influx of loanwords from other European languages, especially French and English languages. These are by far the most important languages when referring to loanwords. There are many examples such as: colchete/crochê "bracket"/"crochet", paletó "jacket", batom "lipstick", and filé/filete "steak"/"slice", rua "street" respectively, from French crochet, paletot, bâton, filet, rue; and bife "steak", futebol, revólver, estoque, folclore, from English beef, football, revolver, stock, folklore. Examples from other European languages: macarrão "pasta", piloto "pilot", carroça "carriage", and barraca "barrack", from Italian maccherone, pilota, carrozza, and baracca; melena "hair lock", fiambre "wet-cured ham" (in Portugal, in contrast with presunto "dry-cured ham" from Latin prae-exsuctus "dehydrated") or "canned ham" (in Brazil, in contrast with non-canned, wet-cured presunto cozido and dry-cured presunto cru), and castelhano "Castilian", from Spanish melena "mane", fiambre and castellano. Before the last four decades, Brazilians adopted a greater number of loanwords from Japanese and other European languages (due to the historical immigration affecting their demographics), and they were and are also more willing to adopt foreign terms that come from globalization than the Portuguese, while the degree of African, Tupian and other Amerindian lexicon in Brazilian Portuguese is shown to be surprisingly lesser than that commonly expected of the said variant by the local Africanist and Indianist academia (that also has to some degree influenced the common sense of what gives a different cultural identity of Brazilians in relation to the Portuguese), so that its lexicon is almost identical (about 99%) to that of European Portuguese.[78][79][80] Many Portuguese settlers to Colonial Brazil were from northern and insular Portugal,[81] apart from some historically important illegal immigrants from elsewhere in Europe, such as Galicia, France and the Netherlands.[82] It should be noted that Brazil received more European immigrants in its colonial history than the United States. Between 1500 and 1760, 700,000 Europeans (overwhelmingly Portuguese) settled in Brazil, while 530,000 Europeans settled in the United States for the same given time.[83] Classification and related languages[edit] Map showing the historical retreat and expansion of Portuguese (Galician-Portuguese) within the context of its linguistic neighbours between the year 1000 and 2000. Map showing mostly contemporary West Iberian and Occitano-Romance languages, as well many of their mainland European dialects (take note that areas colored green, gold or pink/purple represent languages deemed endangered by UNESCO, so this may be outdated in less than a few decades). It shows European Portuguese, Galician, Eonavian, Mirandese and the Fala as not only closely related but as dialect continuum, though it excludes dialects spoken in insular Portugal (Azores and Madeira–Canaries is not shown either). Main articles: Iberian Romance languages, Galician-Portuguese and Comparison of Spanish and Portuguese Portuguese belongs to the West Iberian branch of the Romance languages, and it has special ties with the following members of this group: Galician, Fala and portunhol do pampa (the way riverense and its sibling dialects are referred to in Portuguese), its closest relatives. Mirandese, Leonese, Asturian, Extremaduran and Cantabrian (Astur-Leonese languages). Mirandese is the only recognised regional language spoken in Portugal (beside Portuguese, the only official language in Portugal). Spanish and calão (the way caló, language of the Iberian Romani, is referred to in Portuguese). Portuguese and other Romance languages (namely French and Italian) are not mutually intelligible, although they share considerable similarities in both vocabulary and grammar. Portuguese speakers will usually need some formal study before attaining strong comprehension in those Romance languages, and vice versa. However, Portuguese and Galician are mutually intelligible. Given that Portuguese has a larger phonemic inventory than Spanish, Portuguese is only moderately intelligible to many Spanish speakers, despite the strong lexical and grammatical similarity (89%) between the two.[84][85][86][87] Portunhol, a form of code-switching, has a more lively use and is more readily mentioned in popular culture in South America. Said code-switching is not to be confused with the portunhol spoken on the borders of Brazil with Uruguay (dialeto do pampa) and Paraguay (dialeto dos brasiguaios), and of Portugal with Spain (barranquenho), that are Portuguese dialects spoken natively by thousands of people, which have been heavily influenced by Spanish.[88] Portuguese and Spanish are the only Ibero-Romance languages, and perhaps the only Romance languages with such thriving inter-language forms, in which visible and lively bilingual contact dialects and code-switching have formed, in which functional bilingual communication is achieved through attempting an approximation to the target foreign language (known as 'Portunhol') without a learned acquisition process, but nevertheless facilitates communication. There is an emerging literature focused on such phenomena (including informal attempts of standardization of the linguistic continua and their usage).[88] Galician-Portuguese in Spain[edit] The closest language to Portuguese is Galician, spoken in the autonomous community of Galicia (northwestern Spain). The two were at one time a single language, known today as Galician-Portuguese, but since the political separation of Portugal from Galicia they have diverged, especially in pronunciation and vocabulary. But there is still a linguistic continuity, the variant of Galician referred to as "galego-português baixo-limiao" spoken in several Galician villages between the municipalities of Entrimo and Lobios and the transborder region of the natural park of Peneda-Gerês/Xurês. "Considered a rarity, a living vestige of the medieval language that ranged from Cantabria to Mondego [...]".[89] As reported by UNESCO, due to the pressure of the Spanish language in the standard official version of the Galician language, the Galician language was in the verge of disappearing.[89] According to Unesco´s philologist Tapani Salminen, the proximity with the Portuguese language makes Galician a special language that is protected due to its proximity to the Portuguese language.[90] Nevertheless, the core vocabulary and grammar of Galician are still noticeably closer to Portuguese than to those of Spanish. In particular, like Portuguese, it uses the future subjunctive, the personal infinitive, and the synthetic pluperfect. Mutual intelligibility (estimated at 90% by R. A. Hall, Jr., 1989)[91] is excellent between Galicians and northern Portuguese, and also between Galicians and Brazilians. Many linguists consider Galician to be a co-dialect of the Portuguese language. Another member of the Galician-Portuguese group, most commonly thought of as a Galician dialect, is spoken in the Eonavian region in a western strip in Asturias and the westernmost parts of the provinces of León and Zamora, along the frontier with Galicia, between the Eo and Navia rivers (or more exactly Eo and Frexulfe rivers). It is called eonaviego or gallego-asturiano by its speakers. The Fala language, known by its speakers as xalimés, mañegu, a fala de Xálima and chapurráu and in Portuguese as a fala de Xálima, a fala da Estremadura, o galego da Estremadura, valego ou galaico-estremenho, is another descendant of Galician-Portuguese, spoken by a small number of people in the Spanish towns of Valverde del Fresno (Valverdi du Fresnu), Eljas (As Ellas) and San Martín de Trevejo (Sa Martín de Trevellu) in the autonomous community of Extremadura, near the border with Portugal. There is a number of other places in Spain in which the native language of the common people is a descendant of the Galician-Portuguese group, such as La Alamedilla, Cedillo (Cedilho), Herrera de Alcántara (Ferreira d'Alcântara) and Olivenza (Olivença), but in these municipalities, what is spoken is actually Portuguese, not disputed as such in the mainstream. It should be noticed that the diversity of dialects of the Portuguese language is known since the time of medieval Portuguese-Galician language when it coexisted with the Lusitanian-Mozarabic dialect, spoken in the south of Portugal. The dialectal diversity becomes more evident in the work of Fernão d'Oliveira, in the Grammatica da Lingoagem Portuguesa, (1536), where he remarks that the people of Portuguese regions of Beira, Alentejo, Estremadura, and Entre Douro e Minho, all speak differently from each other. Also Contador d'Argote (1725) distinguishes three main varieties of dialects: the local dialects, the dialects of time, and of profession (work jargon). Of local dialects he highlights five main dialects: the dialect of Estremadura, of Entre-Douro e Minho, of Beira, of Algarve and of Trás-os-Montes. He also makes reference to the overseas dialects, the rustic dialects, the poetic dialect and that of prose.[92] In the kingdom of Portugal, "Ladinho" (or "Lingoagem Ladinha") was the name given to the pure Portuguese language romance, without any mixture of Aravia or Gerigonça Judenga.[93] While the term "língua vulgar" was used to name the language before D. Dinis decided to call it "Portuguese language",[94] the erudite version used and known as Galician-Portuguese (the language of the Portuguese court) and all other Portuguese dialects were spoken at the same time. In a historical perspective the Portuguese language was never just one dialect. Just like today there is a standard Portuguese (actually two) among the several dialects of Portuguese, in the past there was Galician-Portuguese as the "standard", coexisting with other dialects. Influence on other languages[edit] See also: List of English words of Portuguese origin, Loan words in Malayalam § Portuguese, Loan words in Indonesian, Japanese words of Portuguese origin, List of Malay loanwords, Portuguese loanwords in Sinhala, Loan words in Sri Lankan Tamil § Portuguese, and Sri Lanka Indo-Portuguese language Portuguese has provided loanwords to many languages, such as Indonesian, Manado Malay, Malayalam, Sri Lankan Tamil and Sinhalese, Malay, Bengali, English, Hindi, Swahili, Afrikaans, Konkani, Marathi, Tetum, Xitsonga, Papiamentu, Japanese, Lanc-Patuá (spoken in northern Brazil), Esan and Sranan Tongo (spoken in Suriname). It left a strong influence on the língua brasílica, a Tupi–Guarani language, which was the most widely spoken in Brazil until the 18th century, and on the language spoken around Sikka in Flores Island, Indonesia. In nearby Larantuka, Portuguese is used for prayers in Holy Week rituals. The Japanese–Portuguese dictionary Nippo Jisho (1603) was the first dictionary of Japanese in a European language, a product of Jesuit missionary activity in Japan. Building on the work of earlier Portuguese missionaries, the Dictionarium Anamiticum, Lusitanum et Latinum (Annamite–Portuguese–Latin dictionary) of Alexandre de Rhodes (1651) introduced the modern orthography of Vietnamese, which is based on the orthography of 17th-century Portuguese. The Romanization of Chinese was also influenced by the Portuguese language (among others), particularly regarding Chinese surnames; one example is Mei. During 1583–88 Italian Jesuits Michele Ruggieri and Matteo Ricci created a Portuguese–Chinese dictionary—the first ever European–Chinese dictionary.[95][96] For instance, as Portuguese merchants were presumably the first to introduce the sweet orange in Europe, in several modern Indo-European languages the fruit has been named after them. Some examples are Albanian portokall, Bulgarian портокал (portokal), Greek πορτοκάλι (portokali), Macedonian portokal, Persian پرتقال (porteghal), and Romanian portocală.[97][98] Related names can be found in other languages, such as Arabic البرتقال (bourtouqal), Georgian ფორთოხალი (p'ort'oxali), Turkish portakal and Amharic birtukan.[97] Also, in southern Italian dialects (e.g. Neapolitan), an orange is portogallo or purtuallo, literally "(the) Portuguese (one)", in contrast to standard Italian arancia. Derived languages[edit] Main article: Portuguese-based creole languages Beginning in the 16th century, the extensive contacts between Portuguese travelers and settlers, African and Asian slaves, and local populations led to the appearance of many pidgins with varying amounts of Portuguese influence. As each of these pidgins became the mother tongue of succeeding generations, they evolved into fully fledged creole languages, which remained in use in many parts of Asia, Africa and South America until the 18th century. Some Portuguese-based or Portuguese-influenced creoles are still spoken today, by over 3 million people worldwide, especially people of partial Portuguese ancestry. Phonology[edit] Main article: Portuguese phonology Portuguese phonology is similar to those of languages such as French (especially that of Quebec), the Gallo-Italic languages, Occitan, Catalan and Franco-Provençal, unlike that of Spanish, which is similar to those of Sardinian and Southern Italian dialects. Some would describe the phonology of Portuguese as a blend of Spanish, Gallo-Romance (e.g. French) and the languages of northern Italy (especially Genoese), but with a deeper Celtic influence.[99] There is a maximum of 9 oral vowels, 2 semivowels and 21 consonants; though some varieties of the language have fewer phonemes. There are also five nasal vowels, which some linguists regard as allophones of the oral vowels. Vowels[edit] Chart of monophthongs of the Portuguese of Lisbon, with its /ɐ, ɐ̃/ in central schwa position. Like Catalan and German, Portuguese uses vowel quality to contrast stressed syllables with unstressed syllables: isolated vowels tend to be raised, and in some cases centralized, when unstressed. Consonants[edit] Consonant phonemes of Portuguese[100][101][102][103] Labial Dental/ Alveolar Dorsal Post- alveolar plain labialized Nasal m n ɲ Plosive voiceless p t k kʷ voiced b d ɡ ɡʷ Fricative voiceless f s ʃ voiced v z ʒ Approximant semivowel j w lateral l ʎ Rhotic trill/fricative ʁ flap ɾ Phonetic notes Semivowels contrast with unstressed high vowels in verbal conjugation, as in (eu) rio /ˈʁi.u/ and (ele) riu /ˈʁiw/.[104] Phonologists discuss whether their nature is vowel or consonant.[105] In most of Brazil and Angola, the consonant hereafter denoted as /ɲ/ is realized as a nasal palatal approximant [j̃], which nasalizes the vowel that precedes it: [ˈnĩj̃u].[106][107] Bisol (2005:122) proposes that Portuguese possesses labio-velar stops /kʷ/ and /ɡʷ/ as additional phonemes rather than sequences of a velar stop and /w/.[103] The consonant hereafter denoted as /ʁ/ has a variety of realizations depending on dialect. In Europe, it is typically a uvular trill [ʀ]; however, a pronunciation as a voiced uvular fricative [ʁ] may be becoming dominant in urban areas. There is also a realization as a voiceless uvular fricative [χ], and the original pronunciation as an alveolar trill [r] also remains very common in various dialects.[108] A common realization of the word-initial /r/ in the Lisbon accent is a voiced uvular trill fricative [ʀ̝].[109] In Brazil, /ʁ/ can be velar, uvular, or glottal and may be voiceless unless between voiced sounds;[110] it is usually pronounced as a voiceless velar fricative [x], a voiceless glottal fricative [h] or voiceless uvular fricative [χ]. See also Guttural R in Portuguese. /s/ and /z/ are normally lamino-alveolar, as in English. However, a number of dialects in northern Portugal pronounce /s/ and /z/ as apico-alveolar sibilants (sounding somewhat like a soft [ʃ] or [ʒ]), as in the Romance languages of northern Iberia. A very few northeastern Portugal dialects still maintain the medieval distinction between apical and laminal sibilants (written s/ss and c/ç/z, respectively). As a phoneme, /tʃ/ only occurs in loanwords, with a tendency for speakers to substitute in /ʃ/. However, [tʃ] is an allophone of /t/ before /i/ in a number of Brazilian dialects. Similarly, [dʒ] is an allophone of /d/ in the same contexts. In northern and central Portugal, the voiced stops /b/, /d/, /ɡ/ are usually lenited to fricatives [β], [ð], and [ɣ] respectively, except at the beginning of words, or after nasal vowels;[111][112] a similar process occurs in Spanish. Grammar[edit] Main article: Portuguese grammar A notable aspect of the grammar of Portuguese is the verb. Morphologically, more verbal inflections from classical Latin have been preserved by Portuguese than by any other major Romance language. The Portuguese and Spanish grammars are very close. It has also some innovations not found in other Romance languages (except Galician and the Fala): The present perfect has an iterative sense unique to the Galician-Portuguese language group. It denotes an action or a series of actions that began in the past and are expected to keep repeating in the future. For instance, the sentence Tenho tentado falar com ela would be translated to "I have been trying to talk to her", not "I have tried to talk to her". On the other hand, the correct translation of the question "Have you heard the latest news?" is not *Tem ouvido a última notícia?, but Ouviu a última notícia?, since no repetition is implied.[113] Vernacular Portuguese still uses the future subjunctive mood, which developed from medieval West Iberian Romance and in present-day Spanish and Galician has almost entirely fallen into disuse. The future subjunctive appears in dependent clauses that denote a condition that must be fulfilled in the future so that the independent clause will occur. English normally employs the present tense under the same circumstances: Se eu for eleito presidente, mudarei a lei. If I should be elected president, I will change the law. Quando fores mais velho, vais entender. When you grow older, you will understand. The personal infinitive: infinitives can inflect according to their subject in person and number, often showing who is expected to perform a certain action; cf. É melhor voltares "It is better [for you] to go back", É melhor voltarmos "It is better [for us] to go back." Perhaps for this reason, infinitive clauses replace subjunctive clauses more often in Portuguese than in other Romance languages. Writing system[edit] Written varieties Portugal and non-1990 Agreement countries Brazil and 1990 Agreement countries translation direcção direção direction óptimo ótimo best, excellent, optimal Main article: Portuguese orthography Portuguese is written with 26 letters of the Latin script, making use of five diacritics to denote stress, vowel height, contraction, nasalization, and etymological assibilation (acute accent, circumflex, grave accent accent, tilde, and cedilla). Accented characters and digraphs are not counted as separate letters for collation purposes. Spelling reforms[edit] Main article: Reforms of Portuguese orthography See also[edit] Anglophone pronunciation of foreign languages (Portuguese section) Angolan literature Brazilian literature European Portuguese International Portuguese Language Institute List of countries where Portuguese is an official language List of international organisations which have Portuguese as an official language List of Portuguese-language poets Mozambican Portuguese Portuguese in Asia and Oceania Portuguese poetry Portuñol Angola portal Brazil portal Cape Verde portal East Timor portal Galicia portal Goa portal Guinea-Bissau portal Macau portal Malacca portal Mozambique portal Portugal portal São Tomé and Príncipe portal Language portal References[edit] ^ "Världens 100 största språk 2010" (The World's 100 Largest Languages in 2010), in Nationalencyklopedin ^ "Portuguese language". University of Leicester. Retrieved 30 June 2014.  ^ See Galician language#Classification and relation with Portuguese ^ Nordhoff, Sebastian; Hammarström, Harald; Forkel, Robert; Haspelmath, Martin, eds. (2013). "Portuguese". Glottolog. Leipzig: Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary Anthropology.  ^ a b c "Estados-membros da CPLP" (in Portuguese). 28 February 2011.  ^ Michael Swan, Bernard Smith (2001). "Portuguese Speakers". Learner English: a Teacher's Guide to Interference and Other Problems. Cambridge University Press.  ^ "CIA World Factbook". Retrieved 12 June 2015.  ^ Henry Edward Watts. Miguel de Cervantes: His Life & Works.  ^ Joseph T. Shipley (1946). Encyclopedia of Literature. Philosophical Library. p. 1188.  ^ Prem Poddar, Rajeev S. Patke, Lars Jensen (2008). "Introduction: The Myths and Realities of Portuguese (Post) Colonial Society". A historical companion to postcolonial literatures: continental Europe and its empires. Edinburgh University Press. p. 431. ISBN 0-7486-2394-9.  CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list (link) ^ a b NOVAimagem.co.pt / Portugal em Linha (8 March 2006). "Museu da Língua Portuguesa aberto ao público no dia 20". Noticiaslusofonas.com. Retrieved 23 July 2012.  ^ "Brazil: Fire engulfs Portuguese language museum in Sao Paulo, one killed". International Business Times. December 22, 2015.  ^ County of Portugal ^ Carvalho, Daniela de (1 February 2013). "Migrants and Identity in Japan and Brazil: The Nikkeijin". ISBN 978-1-135-78765-3.  ^ "Portuguese language in Brazil". Countrystudies.us. Retrieved 23 July 2012.  ^ "Special Eurobarometer 243 "Europeans and their Languages"" (PDF). European Commission. 2006. p. 6. Retrieved 11 May 2011.  ^ Angola: Language Situation (2005). Keith Brown, ed. Encyclopedia of Language and Linguistics (2 ed.). Elsevier. ISBN 0-08-044299-4.  ^ Medeiros, Adelardo. Portuguese in Africa – Angola ^ A. D. Medeiros, Adelardo. "Portuguese in Africa – Mozambique". Retrieved 12 June 2015.  ^ A. D. Medeiros, Adelardo. "Portuguese in Africa – Guinea-Bissau". Retrieved 12 June 2015.  ^ 13,100 Portuguese nationals in 2010 according to Population par nationalité on the site of the "Département des Statistiques d'Andorre" ^ "Bermuda". World InfoZone. Retrieved 21 April 2010.  ^ "Population by mother tongue, by province and territory (2006 Census)". Statistics Canada.  ^ ~500,000 use it as their mother tongue in the 2012 estimate, see Répartition des étrangers par nationalité ^ "Japão: imigrantes brasileiros popularizam língua portuguesa" (in Portuguese). 2008.  ^ "4.6% according to the 2001 census, see". Cia.gov. Retrieved 23 July 2012.  ^ a b Carin Pretorius – Developed CEIT Development CC. "The Namibian". The Namibian.  ^ "Paraguay Ethnologue".  ^ "Languages of Macau".  ^ Fibbi, Rosita (2010). "Les Portugais en Suisse" (PDF). Office fédéral des migrations. Retrieved 13 May 2011.  ^ See "Languages of Venezuela".  ^ Carvalho, Ana Maria (2010). "Portuguese in the USA". In Potowski, Kim. Language Diversity in the USA. Cambridge University Press. p. 346. ISBN 978-0-521-74533-8.  ^ "Portuguese Language in Goa". Colaco.net. Retrieved 21 April 2010.  ^ "The Portuguese Experience: The Case of Goa, Daman and Diu". Rjmacau.com. Retrieved 21 April 2010.  ^ "1.500 pessoas estudam português em Goa". Revistamacau.com. 2 June 2014. Retrieved 10 July 2015.  ^ Factoria Audiovisual S.R.L. (20 July 2010). "El portugués será el tercer idioma oficial de la República de Guinea Ecuatorial – Página Oficial del Gobierno de la República de Guinea Ecuatorial". Guineaecuatorialpress.com. Retrieved 23 July 2012.  ^ "Decreto sobre el portugues como idioma oficial – Página Oficial del Gobierno de la República de Guinea Ecuatorial" (PDF). Retrieved 23 July 2012.  ^ Factoria Audiovisual S.R.L. (25 July 2010). "El Presidente Obiang asiste a la Cumbre de la CPLP – Página Oficial del Gobierno de la República de Guinea Ecuatorial". Guineaecuatorialpress.com. Retrieved 23 July 2012.  ^ "Official languages of Mercosul as agreed in the Protocol of Ouro Preto". Actrav.itcilo.org. Retrieved 23 July 2012.  ^ "Official statute of the organization". Oei.es. Retrieved 23 July 2012.  ^ Artículo 23 for the official languages Archived 27 May 2014 at the Wayback Machine. ^ General Assembly of the OAS, Amendments to the Rules of Procedure of the General Assembly, 5 June 2000 ^ Article 11, Protocol on Amendments to the Constitutive Act of the African Union [1] ^ "Languages in Europe – Official EU Languages". EUROPA web portal. Archived from the original on 2 February 2009. Retrieved 12 October 2009.  ^ "The World Factbook – Field Listing – Population – CIA". Central Intelligence Agency. Retrieved 14 January 2015.  ^ "Uruguayan government makes Portuguese mandatory" (in Portuguese). 5 November 2007. Retrieved 13 July 2010.  ^ "Portuguese will be mandatory in high school" (in Spanish). 21 January 2009. Retrieved 13 July 2010.  ^ "Portuguese language will be option in the official Venezuelan teachings" (in Portuguese). 24 May 2009. Retrieved 13 July 2010.  ^ "Zambia will adopt the Portuguese language in their Basic school" (in Portuguese). 26 May 2009. Retrieved 13 July 2010.  ^ a b c d "Congo will start to teach Portuguese in schools" (in Portuguese). 4 June 2010. Archived from the original on 7 August 2010. Retrieved 13 July 2010.  ^ a b "Portuguese language gaining popularity". Anglopress Edicões e Publicidade Lda. 5 May 2007. Retrieved 18 May 2011.  ^ http://www.exactinvest.dk/media/2466/mapping_speakers_of_portuguese_around_the_world.pdf ^ Leach, Michael (2007). "talking Portuguese; China and East Timor". Arena Magazine. Retrieved 18 May 2011.  ^ (Portuguese) The process of Norm change for the good pronunciation of the Portuguese language in chant and dramatics in Brazil during 1938, 1858 and 2007 ^ (Portuguese) Carioca accent is the standard – The so-called "supremacy of the carioca speech", an issue of norm ^ "Audio samples of the dialects of Portuguese". Instituto Camões. Retrieved 12 June 2015.  ^ "Nheengatu and caipira dialect". Sosaci.org. Retrieved 23 July 2012.  ^ (Portuguese) Acoustic-phonetic characteristics of the Brazilian Portuguese's retroflex /r/: data from respondents in Pato Branco, Paraná. Irineu da Silva Ferraz. Pages 19–21 ^ (Portuguese) Syllable coda /r/ in the "capital" of the paulista hinterland: sociolinguistic analysis. Cândida Mara Britto LEITE. Page 111 (page 2 in the attached PDF) ^ (Portuguese) Callou, Dinah. Leite, Yonne. "Iniciação à Fonética e à Fonologia". Jorge Zahar Editora 2001, p. 24 ^ (Portuguese) To know a language is really about separating correct from awry? Language is a living organism that varies by context and goes far beyond a collection of rules and norms of how to speak and write Museu da Língua Portuguesa. Archived 22 December 2012 at the Wayback Machine. ^ (Portuguese) Linguistic prejudice and the surprising (academic and formal) unity of Brazilian Portuguese ^ http://www.protexto.ufc.br/genero_academico/artigo_cientifico/AAC12.doc ^ [2] ^ [3] ^ [4] ^ [5] ^ "Revisitando a palatalização no português brasileiro – Silva – Revista de Estudos da Linguagem". ufmg.br.  ^ "Learn about Portuguese language". Sibila. Retrieved 27 November 2012.  ^ Note: the speaker of this sound file is from Rio de Janeiro, and he is talking about his experience with nordestino and nortista accents. ^ por Caipira Zé Do Mér dia 17 de maio de 2011, 6 Comentários. "O MEC, o "português errado" e a linguistica... | ImprenÇa". Imprenca.com. Archived from the original on 19 April 2012. Retrieved 23 July 2012.  ^ "Cartilha Do Mec Ensina Erro De Português". Saindo da Matrix. Retrieved 23 July 2012.  ^ "Livro do MEC ensina o português errado ou apenas valoriza as formas linguísticas?". Jornal de Beltrão (in Portuguese). 26 May 2011. Retrieved 23 July 2012.  ^ "Sotaque branco". Meia Maratona Internacional CAIXA de Brasília accessdate=25 September 2012.  CS1 maint: Missing pipe (link)[dead link] ^ "O Que É? Amazônia". Associação de Defesa do Meio Ambiente Araucária (AMAR). Retrieved 25 September 2012.  ^ "Fala NORTE". Fala UNASP – Centro Universitário Adventista de São Paulo. Retrieved 25 September 2012.  ^ "Rothari -Edictus" (PDF). Retrieved 12 June 2015.  ^ da Prista, Alexander (1979). Say It in Portuguese. Courier Dover Publications. p. vii. Retrieved 12 June 2015.  ^ Keller, Karen (2006). Portuguese for Dummies. p. 9. Retrieved 12 June 2015.  ^ Swan, Michael; Smith, Bernard (2001). Learner English. Cambridge University Press. p. 113. Retrieved 12 June 2015.  ^ Florentino, Manolo, and Machado, Cacilda. (Portuguese) Essay about Portuguese immigration and the patterns of miscegenation in Brazil in the 19th and 20rh centuries (PDF file) ^ (Portuguese) Eduardo Fonseca, the Dutch Brazilians – Brazilians in the Netherlands ^ Renato Pinto Venâncio, "Presença portuguesa: de colonizadores a imigrantes" i.e. Portuguese presence: from colonizers to immigrants, chap. 3 of Brasil: 500 anos de povoamento (IBGE). Relevant extract available here [6] Archived 24 February 2013 at the Wayback Machine. ^ Jensen, John B. (1989). "On the Mutual Intelligibility of Spanish and Portuguese". Hispania 72 (4): 848–852. doi:10.2307/343562. JSTOR 343562.  ^ Penny, Ralph (2000). Variation and Change in Spanish. Cambridge University Press. p. 14. ISBN 0-521-78045-4.  ^ Dalby, Andrew (1998). Dictionary of Languages: The Definitive Reference to More Than 400 Languages. Columbia University Press. p. 501. ISBN 0-231-11568-7.  ^ Ginsburgh, Victor; Weber, Shlomo (2011). How Many Languages Do We Need?: The Economics of Linguistic Diversity. Princeton University Press. p. 90. ISBN 978-0-691-13689-9.  ^ a b Lipski, John M (2006). Face, Timothy L; Klee, Carol A, eds. "Too close for comfort? the genesis of 'portuñol/portunhol'" (PDF). Selected Proceedings of the 8th Hispanic Linguistics Symposium (Somerville, MA: Cascadilla Proceedings Project): 1–22. Retrieved 2015-06-21.  ^ a b "A Fala Galego-Portuguesa Da Baiza Limia e Castro Laboreiro" (PDF). Retrieved 12 June 2015.  ^ Grupo El Correo Gallego. "O galego deixa de ser unha das linguas". Galicia Hoxe – Noticias en galego a diario. Retrieved 30 May 2015.  ^ "Galician". Ethnologue. Retrieved 21 April 2010.  ^ "Jerónimo Cantador de Argote e a Dialectologia Portuguesa (continuação)". Lusografias. Retrieved 30 May 2015.  ^ Diccionario da lingua portugueza. Retrieved 30 May 2015.  ^ "D.Dinis: o Rei a Língua e o Reino" (PDF). Retrieved 12 June 2015.  ^ Camus, Yves. "Jesuits' Journeys in Chinese Studies" (PDF). Retrieved 12 June 2015.  ^ "Dicionário Português–Chinês : Pu Han ci dian: Portuguese–Chinese dictionary", by Michele Ruggieri, Matteo Ricci; edited by John W. Witek. Published 2001, Biblioteca Nacional. ISBN 97-2565-298-3. Partial preview available on Google Books ^ a b "Multilingual Multiscript Plant Name Database: Sorting Citrus Names". University of Melbourne <http://www.search.unimelb.edu.au>. Retrieved 11 December 2012.  ^ Ostergren, Robert C. and Le Bosse, Mathias (2011). The Europeans, Second Edition: A Geography of People, Culture, and Environment. Guilford Press. p. 129. ISBN 978-1-60918-140-6.  CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list (link) ^ Handbook of the International Phonetic Association pp. 126–130 ^ Cruz-Ferreira (1995:91) ^ Barbosa & Albano (2004:228–229) ^ Sobre os Ditongos do Português Europeu. Carvalho, Joana. Faculdade de Letras da Universidade do Porto. Page 20 (page 10 of PDF file). Citation: A conclusão será que nos encontramos em presença de dois segmentos fonológicos /kʷ/ e /ɡʷ/, respetivamente, com uma articulação vocálica. Bisol (2005:122), tal como Freitas (1997), afirma que não estamos em presença de um ataque ramificado. Neste caso, a glide, juntamente com a vogal que a sucede, forma um ditongo no nível pós-lexical. Esta conclusão implica um aumento do número de segmentos no inventário segmental fonológico do português. ^ a b Bisol (2005:122). Citation: A proposta é que a sequencia consoante velar + glide posterior seja indicada no léxico como uma unidade monofonemática /kʷ/ e /ɡʷ/. O glide que, nete caso, situa-se no ataque não-ramificado, forma com a vogal seguinte um ditongo crescente em nível pós lexical. Ditongos crescentes somente se formam neste nível. Em resumo, a consoante velar e o glide posterior, quando seguidos de a/o, formam uma só unidade fonológica, ou seja, um segmento consonantal com articulação secundária vocálica, em outros termos, um segmento complexo. ^ Rodrigues (2012:39–40) ^ Bisol (2005:123) ^ Thomas (1974:8) ^ Perini, Mário Alberto (2002), Modern Portuguese (A Reference Grammar), New Haven: Yale University Press, ISBN 978-0-300-09155-7  ^ Mateus & d'Andrade (2000:5–6, 11) ^ Grønnum (2005:157) ^ Barbosa & Albano (2004:228) ^ Cruz-Ferreira (1995:92) ^ Mateus & d'Andrade (2000:11) ^ Squartini, Mario (1998) Verbal Periphrases in Romance—Aspect, Actionality, and Grammaticalization ISBN 3-11-016160-5 História da Lingua Portuguesa Instituto Camões A Língua Portuguesa in Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Norte, Brazil Literature[edit] Poesia e Prosa Medievais, by Maria Ema Tarracha Ferreira, Ulisseia 1998, 3rd ed., ISBN 978-9-72-568124-4. Bases Temáticas—Língua, Literatura e Cultura Portuguesa in Instituto Camões Portuguese literature in The Catholic Encyclopedia Phonology, orthography and grammar[edit] Barbosa, Plínio A.; Albano, Eleonora C. (2004). "Brazilian Portuguese". Journal of the International Phonetic Association 34 (2): 227–232. doi:10.1017/S0025100304001756.  Bergström, Magnus & Reis, Neves Prontuário Ortográfico Editorial Notícias, 2004. Bisol, Leda (2005), Introdução a estudos de fonologia do português brasileiro (in Portuguese), Porto Alegre – Rio Grande do Sul: EDIPUCRS, ISBN 85-7430-529-4  Cruz-Ferreira, Madalena (1995). "European Portuguese". Journal of the International Phonetic Association 25 (2): 90–94. doi:10.1017/S0025100300005223.  Grønnum, Nina (2005), Fonetik og fonologi, Almen og Dansk (3rd ed.), Copenhagen: Akademisk Forlag, ISBN 87-500-3865-6  Mateus, Maria Helena; d'Andrade, Ernesto (2000), The Phonology of Portuguese, Oxford University Press, ISBN 0-19-823581-X  Rodrigues, Marisandra Costa (2012), Encontros Vocálicos Finais em Português: Descrição e Análise Otimalista (PDF) (thesis), Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro  Thomas, Earl W. (1974), A Grammar of Spoken Brazilian Portuguese, Nashville, TN: Vanderbilt University Press, ISBN 0-8265-1197-X  A pronúncia do português europeu—European Portuguese Pronunciation Dialects of Portuguese at the Instituto Camões Audio samples of the dialects of Portugal Audio samples of the dialects from outside Europe Portuguese Grammar Reference dictionaries[edit] Antônio Houaiss (2000), Dicionário Houaiss da Língua Portuguesa (228,500 entries). Aurélio Buarque de Holanda Ferreira, Novo Dicionário da Língua Portuguesa (1809pp) English–Portuguese–Chinese Dictionary (Freeware for Windows/Linux/Mac) Linguistic studies[edit] Cook, Manuela. Portuguese Pronouns and Other Forms of Address, from the Past into the Future – Structural, Semantic and Pragmatic Reflections, Ellipsis, vol. 11, APSA, www.portuguese-apsa.com/ellipsis, 2013 Cook, Manuela. Uma Teoria de Interpretação das Formas de Tratamento na Língua Portuguesa, Hispania, vol 80, nr 3, AATSP, 1997 Cook, Manuela. On the Portuguese Forms of Address: From "Vossa Mercê" to "Você", Portuguese Studies Review 3.2, Durham: University of New Hampshire, 1995 Lindley Cintra, Luís F. Nova Proposta de Classificação dos Dialectos Galego- Portugueses (PDF) Boletim de Filologia, Lisboa, Centro de Estudos Filológicos, 1971. External links[edit] Portuguese edition of Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Find more about Portuguese language at Wikipedia's sister projects Definitions from Wiktionary Media from Commons Textbooks from Wikibooks Travel guide from Wikivoyage Learning resources from Wikiversity Data from Wikidata Portuguese language at DMOZ   Links to related articles v t e Languages of Brazil Official language Portuguese Regional languages German Pomeranian Riograndenser Hunsrückisch Italian Talian Indigenous languages Arawakan Atorada Barawana Mapidian Mehinaku Palikúr Paresi Terêna Wapishana Warekena Waurá Arawan Deni Jamamadí Kulina Paumarí Zuruahá Cariban Amonap Apalaí Bakairi Carib Hixkaryana Ikpeng Macushi Pará Arára Salumá Sikiana Waiwai Panoan Amawaka Kashinawa Shipibo Yaminawa Macro-Jê Apinayé Bororo Kaingang Karajá Kayapo Krenak Ofayé Panara Rikbaktsa Suyá Timbira Xavante Xerénte Nadahup Dâw Hup Kakwa Nadëb Tupian Akwáwa Jurúna Kagwahiva Kaiwá Munduruku Nheengatu Omagua Tapirapé Tenetehara Xeta Xipaya Zo'é Others Aikanã Arutani Cubeo Ewarhuyana Guató Irantxe Kadiwéu Kanamarí Katawixi Kwaza Mamaindê Nambikwara Ninam Oro Win Pirahã Ticuna Tuyuca Wanano Wari’ Xukuru Interlanguages Cafundó Lanc-Patuá Macarrônico Portunhol Fronteiriço Sign languages Brazilian Sign Ka'apor Sign v t e Languages of Portugal Official language Portuguese Regional languages Barranquenho Minderico Mirandese Sign languages Portuguese Sign Language v t e Romance languages (Classification)   Western Ibero-Romance Galician-Portuguese Portuguese dialects European Brazilian African Asian Creoles Galician Eonavian/Galician-Asturian Fala Judaeo-Portuguese Calão Astur-Leonese Asturian Cantabrian Extremaduran Leonese Mirandese Spanish Spanish dialects Latin American Philippine Equatoguinean European Creoles Old Spanish Judaeo-Spanish Caló Others Navarro-Aragonese Aragonese Judaeo-Aragonese Mozarabic Occitano- Romance Catalan dialects Eastern Catalan Alguerese Balearic Central Northern Western Catalan North-Western Valencian Judaeo-Catalan Catalan Caló Occitan Auvergnat Gascon Aranese Languedocien Limousin Provençal Niçard Mentonasc Vivaro-Alpine Old Provençal Judaeo-Provençal Gallo-Romance Langues d'oïl Burgundian Champenois Franc-Comtois French dialects Standard African Aostan Belgian Cambodian Canadian Indian Laotian Swiss Vietnamese Old French Middle French Judaeo-French Creoles Gallo Lorrain Norman Anglo-Norman Picard Poitevin Saintongeais Walloon Others Arpitan/Franco-Provençal Valdôtain Savoyard North Italian dialects Gallo-Italic Ligurian Brigasc Genoese Intemelio Monégasque Lombard Western Eastern Emilian-Romagnol Emilian Bolognese Parmigiano Romagnol Piedmontese Judaeo-Piedmontese Gallo-Italic of Sicily Gallo-Italic of Basilicata Others Venetian Fiuman Talian Triestine Rhaeto-Romance Rhaeto-Romance Friulian Ladin Romansh   Central, Sardinian and Eastern Italo-Dalmatian Italian Italian dialects Central Tuscan Corsican Gallurese Sassarese Judaeo-Italian Southern Italian Neapolitan Northern Calabrese Sicilian Southern Calabrese Others Dalmatian Istriot Sardinian Sardinian Sardinian Campidanese Logudorese Eastern Romanian Romanian Moldovan Vlach Others Aromanian Istro-Romanian Megleno-Romanian North African North African African Romance Italics indicate extinct languages Bold indicates languages with more than 5 million speakers Languages between parentheses are varieties of the language on their left. v t e Languages of South America Sovereign states Argentina Bolivia Brazil Chile Colombia Ecuador Guyana Paraguay Peru Suriname Uruguay Venezuela Dependencies and other territories Falkland Islands French Guiana South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands v t e Portuguese dialects Africa (Portuguese in Africa) Angolan Cape Verdean Guinean Mozambican São Tomean Americas (Portuguese in the Americas) Brazilian Caipira Central Northeastern Florianopolitan North Coast Uruguayan Asia (Portuguese in Asia and Oceania) Damanese East Timorese Goan Macau Europe (Portuguese in Europe) Açoriano Alentejano Barranquenho Algarvio Alto-Alentejano Alto-Minhoto Baixo-Beirão Beirão Estremenho Nortenho Transmontano Galego Eonavian Fala Judaeo-Portuguese Portuguese Caló Minderico See also Geographic distribution of Portuguese Portuguese phonology Portuguese vocabulary Authority control GND: 4120316-1 NDL: 00569165 Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Portuguese_language&oldid=719063290" Categories: Portuguese language Community of Portuguese Language Countries Languages of Angola Languages of Brazil Languages of Cape Verde Languages of East Timor Languages of Guinea-Bissau Languages of Macau Languages of Mozambique Languages of Portugal Languages of São Tomé and Príncipe Subject–verb–object languages Hidden categories: CS1 Portuguese-language sources (pt) CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list CS1 Spanish-language sources (es) Articles with Portuguese-language external links CS1 maint: Missing pipe All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from June 2015 Wikipedia indefinitely move-protected pages Articles containing Portuguese-language text Languages with ISO 639-2 code Languages with ISO 639-1 code Articles citing Nationalencyklopedin All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from March 2015 Articles containing French-language text Articles containing Spanish-language text Articles containing Italian-language text Articles containing Romanian-language text Articles containing Latin-language text Articles containing Catalan-language text Articles containing Sardinian-language text Articles with DMOZ links Use dmy dates from July 2012 Wikipedia articles with GND identifiers Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Article Talk Variants Views Read Edit View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Featured content Current events Random article Donate to Wikipedia Wikipedia store Interaction Help About Wikipedia Community portal Recent changes Contact page Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Cite this page Print/export Create a book Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikibooks Wikivoyage Languages Адыгэбзэ Afrikaans Alemannisch አማርኛ Ænglisc العربية Aragonés ܐܪܡܝܐ Arpetan Asturianu Avañe'ẽ Azərbaycanca বাংলা Bahasa Banjar Bân-lâm-gú Башҡортса Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца)‎ Bikol Central Български Boarisch བོད་ཡིག Bosanski Brezhoneg Буряад Català Чӑвашла Cebuano Čeština Chavacano de Zamboanga Corsu Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch ދިވެހިބަސް Dolnoserbski Eesti Ελληνικά Emiliàn e rumagnòl Эрзянь Español Esperanto Estremeñu Euskara Eʋegbe فارسی Fiji Hindi Føroyskt Français Frysk Furlan Gaeilge Gaelg Gàidhlig Galego 贛語 客家語/Hak-kâ-ngî 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hornjoserbsce Hrvatski Ido Ilokano Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Ирон IsiZulu Íslenska Italiano עברית Basa Jawa ಕನ್ನಡ Kapampangan Къарачай-малкъар ქართული Қазақша Kernowek Kinyarwanda Kiswahili Коми Kongo Kreyòl ayisyen Kurdî Кыргызча Ladino Лезги ລາວ لۊری شومالی Latgaļu Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvių Ligure Limburgs Lingála Lumbaart Magyar Македонски Malagasy മലയാളം Māori मराठी მარგალური مصرى مازِرونی Bahasa Melayu Baso Minangkabau Mìng-dĕ̤ng-ngṳ̄ Mirandés Монгол Nāhuatl Dorerin Naoero Nederlands Nedersaksies नेपाल भाषा 日本語 Napulitano Нохчийн Nordfriisk Norfuk / Pitkern Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Nouormand Novial Occitan Олык марий Oʻzbekcha/ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ Pangasinan پنجابی Papiamentu Piemontèis Plattdüütsch Polski Português Qaraqalpaqsha Qırımtatarca Reo tahiti Română Rumantsch Runa Simi Русиньскый Русский Саха тыла Sámegiella Gagana Samoa संस्कृतम् Sardu Scots Sesotho sa Leboa Shqip Sicilianu Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Ślůnski کوردیی ناوەندی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Basa Sunda Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் Татарча/tatarça Tetun ไทย Тоҷикӣ ᏣᎳᎩ Türkçe Українська اردو ئۇيغۇرچە / Uyghurche Vèneto Vepsän kel’ Tiếng Việt Volapük Walon West-Vlams Winaray 吴语 ייִדיש Yorùbá 粵語 Zazaki Žemaitėška 中文 Edit links This page was last modified on 7 May 2016, at 10:52. Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view