List of Portuguese flags - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia List of Portuguese flags From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to: navigation, search This is a list of flags used in Portugal. Contents 1 National flag 2 Autonomous regions 3 District Capitals 4 Governmental flags 5 Military flags 6 Historical flags 6.1 National flags 6.2 Overseas territories 7 See also 8 External links National flag[edit] Flag Date Use Description 30 June 1911 – national flags and national ensign A green and red rectangle with the national coat of arms (an armillary sphere and a Portuguese shield). Autonomous regions[edit] Flag Date Use Description 1979–present Flag of Autonomous Region of the Azores. This flag is similar to the flag of Portugal used between 1830 and 1910, except that the Portuguese coat of arms has been replaced by nine five-sided stars in an semi-circular arch over a stylized golden goshawk (in Portuguese: Açor), the symbol of the Azores, positioned over the border of the two bands. 1978–present Flag of the Autonomous Region of Madeira. A blue-gold-blue vertical triband with a red-bordered white Cross of Christ in the center. District Capitals[edit] Note: These flags do not usually represent the districts per se, but only the municipalities where each capital is located. Flag of Aveiro Flag of Beja Flag of Braga Flag of Bragança Flag of Castelo Branco Flag of Coimbra Flag of Évora Flag of Faro Flag of Guarda Flag of Leiria Flag of Lisboa Flag of Portalegre Flag of Porto Flag of Santarém Flag of Setúbal Flag of Viana do Castelo Flag of Vila Real Flag of Viseu Governmental flags[edit] Flag Date Use Description 1911–present Flag of the President of the Republic A green rectangle with the national coat of arms. 2006–present Flag of the Assembly of the Republic A white rectangle (ratio 2:3) with a centrally positioned minor coat of arms and a green bordure. 1972–present Prime Minister flag This flag is like the flag of the President, but is white with a green saltire with the Arms (sphere and shield) at the centre. There is a red border on all four sides with a pattern of laurel leaves in gold. This replaces the former flag of the Minister of defence. 1911–present Minister flag Same flag as the prime-minister, but without the red border. 1911–1974 Flag of the Minister of the Navy White flag with a green cross of Saint George, with the Arms in the centre. As the position of "Minister of the Navy" has been abolished, the flag is currently not used. 1952–present Flag of the Defence Minister 1911–1974 Flag of the War/Army Minister Flag divided vertically like that of the Army, but with five white stars over all, arranged in a ring. As the position of "Minister of the War/Army" has been abolished, the flag is currently not used. Military flags[edit] Flag Date Use Description 30 June 1911 – Regimental colours of the Portuguese Armed Forces Equally divided in green and red with the national coat of arms enclosed by two yellow laurel shoots intersecting at their stems and bound by a white scroll bearing Camões's verse "Esta é a ditosa pátria minha amada" (English: "This is my beloved fortunate fatherland") as the motto. 30 June 1911 – Naval jack of Portugal A square with a green-bordered red field charged with the national coat of arms on the center. Historical flags[edit] National flags[edit] Flag Date Use Description 1095–1143 A blue cross on a white (or silver) field. 1143–1185 A blue cross with five blue escutcheons each charged with an undetermined number of bezants on a white field. 1185–1248 Five blue escutcheons each charged with an undetermined number of bezants on a white field. 1248–1385 Five blue escutcheons each charged with an undetermined number of bezants on a white field. Border: red with yellow castles (number not fixed). 1385–1485 Five blue escutcheons each charged with an undetermined number of bezants on a white field. Border: red with yellow castles and a green cross of the Order of Aviz. 1485–1495 Five blue escutcheons each charged with 5 bezants on a white field. Border: red with 7 yellow castles. 1495–1521 1521–1578 1578–1640 1616–1640 Putative flag 1640–1667 1667–1706 1706–1750 1826–1830 1750–1816 1816–1826 1830–1910 Used on land Vertical bicolour blue-white. Proportion of the fields: 1:1. 1830–1910 Used at sea Vertical bicolour blue-white. Proportion of the fields: 1:2. Overseas territories[edit] Flag Date Use Description 1975–1999 Flag of the Government of Macau. During the Portuguese administration this flag also represented the Territory of Macau in the international forums, although it was not the official flag of the Portuguese colony. A light blue field charged with the coat of arms of Government of Macau. Flag of the Municipality of Macau, one of two local municipal governments. This was the flag used at the handover to China in 1999. A light blue field charged with the coat of arms of Municipality of Macau. See also[edit] A Portuguesa Coat of arms of Portugal List of personal standards of the Kings of Portugal List of Macanese flags Portuguese vexillology External links[edit] Media related to Flags of Portugal at Wikimedia Commons v t e Lists of flags Lists of flags State-related Arab states Civil flag Country Date of Adoption Historical flags State flag Mobile Air Forces Roundels Air Forces Fin Flashes Civil ensign Civil air ensign Other entities Country subdivisions Ethnic By design Color by number by combination Two-sided Aspect ratio By nations Argentina Armenia Australia Austria Azerbaijan Bahamas Bangladesh Barbados Belarus Belgium Bosnia & Herzegovina Brazil Cambodia Canada Chile China People's Republic of China Republic of China (Taiwan) Hong Kong Macau Colombia Costa Rica Croatia Denmark Dem. Rep. Congo Dominican Republic Egypt Estonia Finland France regions Germany Georgia Greece Haiti Hungary Iceland India Ireland Israel Iraq Italy Jamaica Japan Kazakhstan Kenya Korea North Korea South Korea Latvia Lithuania Luxembourg Macedonia Malaysia Mexico Malta Moldova Morocco Montenegro Netherlands New Zealand Norway Pakistan Peru Philippines Poland naval and maritime voivodeships Portugal Rhodesia Romania Russia federal subjects Russian Navy Serbia Kosovo Singapore South Africa Soviet Union republics Soviet Navy Spain Sri Lanka Sweden Switzerland Thailand Ukraine United Kingdom England Northern Ireland Scotland Wales Falkland Islands Gibraltar United States states Puerto Rico CSA Uzbekistan Vatican City Venezuela Vietnam Yugoslavia Zimbabwe By continent Africa Antarctica Asia Europe North America Oceania South America Names in italics indicate non-sovereign (dependent) territories, disputed states and/or former countries. Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=List_of_Portuguese_flags&oldid=714106420" Categories: Lists and galleries of flags Flags of Portugal Portugal-related lists Hidden categories: Commons category with local link same as on Wikidata Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Article Talk Variants Views Read Edit View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Featured content Current events Random article Donate to Wikipedia Wikipedia store Interaction Help About Wikipedia Community portal Recent changes Contact page Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Cite this page Print/export Create a book Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Languages Nederlands Português ไทย Edit links This page was last modified on 7 April 2016, at 17:31. Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view