Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Main Page From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to: navigation, search Welcome to Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia that anyone can edit. 5,146,247 articles in English Arts Biography Geography History Mathematics Science Society Technology All portals From today's featured article Arlene Schnitzer Concert Hall Music for a Time of War is a 2011 Oregon Symphony concert recording of four compositions: Charles Ives' The Unanswered Question (1906), John Adams' The Wound-Dresser (1989), Benjamin Britten's Sinfonia da Requiem (1940) and Ralph Vaughan Williams' Symphony No. 4 (1935). The program was performed on May 7 and May 8 under the artistic direction of Carlos Kalmar at the Arlene Schnitzer Concert Hall (pictured) in Portland, Oregon, and again on May 12 at Carnegie Hall. A concert album, the orchestra's first in eight years, was released five months later on CD by Dutch record label PentaTone Classics. The live performances and album received favorable reviews; the recording debuted at number 31 on Billboard's Classical Albums chart, and made several lists of the best classical recordings of 2011. The album earned two nominations from the National Academy of Recording Arts and Sciences for the 2013 Grammy Awards, and producer Blanton Alspaugh received the Grammy for Producer of the Year, Classical, for his contributions to this and other recordings. (Full article...) Recently featured: American Pharoah Russula virescens Capon Lake Whipple Truss Bridge Archive By email More featured articles... Did you know... Eduardo Sasha ... that Brazilian footballer Eduardo Sasha (pictured) is nicknamed after the model and actress Sasha Meneghel? ... that during World War II, the six-member Steinlauf family from the Nowy Sącz Ghetto were rescued by the nine-member Król family, who were risking the death penalty? ... that snowfall in Buenos Aires is rare, being observed only three times since the start of meteorological observations in 1906? ... that Max Reger dedicated Der Einsiedler to conductor Philipp Wolfrum and his choir, but they performed the premiere only after the composer's death, together with his Requiem? ... that the Tennessee Walking Horse RPM was sold as a four-year-old for US$1.25 million? ... that the music video for "Girls / Girls / Boys" was inspired by D'Angelo's video for "Untitled (How Does It Feel)"? ... that following safety-related rule changes to limit throwing distances, the U.S. women's high school record for the javelin throw set by Barbara Friedrich in 1967 may never be broken? ... that in the upcoming open world science fiction game Rokh, players must survive on Mars? Recently improved articles Start a new article Nominate an article In the news Enda Kenny In horse racing, Nyquist, ridden by Mario Gutierrez, wins the Kentucky Derby. Enda Kenny (pictured) of Fine Gael is re-elected Taoiseach of Ireland and forms a minority coalition government. A wildfire in Canada displaces 88,000 people and destroys more than 1,600 buildings in Fort McMurray, Alberta. In association football, Leicester City win the English Premier League for the first time. Mark Selby defeats Ding Junhui to win the World Snooker Championship. The Kenyan government burns the largest-ever pile of ivory to combat illegal ivory trade. Teodoro Obiang Nguema Mbasogo is re-elected President of Equatorial Guinea. Recent deaths More current events... On this day... May 8: Victory in Europe Day; World Red Cross and Red Crescent Day; Miguel Hidalgo's Birthday in Mexico; Parents' Day in South Korea A glass of Coca-Cola 1842 – A train derailed and caught fire in Paris, killing between 52 and 200 people. 1886 – In Atlanta, American pharmacist John Pemberton first sold his carbonated beverage Coca-Cola (glass pictured) as a patent medicine, claiming that it cured a number of diseases. 1924 – Lithuania signed the Klaipėda Convention with the nations of the Conference of Ambassadors, formally taking the Klaipėda Region (German: Memelland) from East Prussia and making it into an autonomous region under unconditional sovereignty of Lithuania. 1945 – A parade to celebrate the end of World War II turned into a riot, followed by widespread disturbances and killings in and around Sétif, French Algeria. 1972 – Four members of Black September hijacked Sabena Flight 571 to demand the release of 315 convicted Palestinian terrorists. More anniversaries: May 7 May 8 May 9 Archive By email List of historical anniversaries Current date: May 8, 2016 (UTC) Reload this page Today's featured picture The Kota Kinabalu City Mosque is the second main mosque in Kota Kinabalu, Sabah, Malaysia, after State Mosque in Sembulan. Preparations for the mosque began in 1989, and after several delays it was officially opened in 2000 and nicknamed "The Floating Mosque" as it sits on a man-made lagoon. The Kota Kinabalu City Mosque has room for 12,000 worshipers. Photograph: Uwe Aranas Recently featured: Daedongyeojido Crater Lake White-rumped shama Archive More featured pictures... Other areas of Wikipedia Community portal – Bulletin board, projects, resources and activities covering a wide range of Wikipedia areas. Help desk – Ask questions about using Wikipedia. Local embassy – For Wikipedia-related communication in languages other than English. Reference desk – Serving as virtual librarians, Wikipedia volunteers tackle your questions on a wide range of subjects. Site news – Announcements, updates, articles and press releases on Wikipedia and the Wikimedia Foundation. Village pump – For discussions about Wikipedia itself, including areas for technical issues and policies. Wikipedia's sister projects Wikipedia is hosted by the Wikimedia Foundation, a non-profit organization that also hosts a range of other projects: Commons Free media repository MediaWiki Wiki software development Meta-Wiki Wikimedia project coordination Wikibooks Free textbooks and manuals Wikidata Free knowledge base Wikinews Free-content news Wikiquote Collection of quotations Wikisource Free-content library Wikispecies Directory of species Wikiversity Free learning materials and activities Wikivoyage Free travel guide Wiktionary Dictionary and thesaurus Wikipedia languages This Wikipedia is written in English. Started in 2001 (2001), it currently contains 5,146,247 articles. Many other Wikipedias are available; some of the largest are listed below. More than 1,000,000 articles: Deutsch Español Français Italiano Nederlands 日本語 Polski Русский Svenska Tiếng Việt More than 250,000 articles: العربية Bahasa Indonesia Bahasa Melayu Català Čeština فارسی 한국어 Magyar Norsk bokmål Português Română Srpski Srpskohrvatski Suomi Türkçe Українська 中文 More than 50,000 articles: Bosanski Български Dansk Eesti Ελληνικά English (simple form) Esperanto Euskara Galego עברית Hrvatski Latviešu Lietuvių Norsk nynorsk Slovenčina Slovenščina ไทย Complete list of Wikipedias Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Main_Page&oldid=696846920" Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Main Page Talk Variants Views Read View source View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Featured content Current events Random article Donate to Wikipedia Wikipedia store Interaction Help About Wikipedia Community portal Recent changes Contact page Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Cite this page Print/export Create a book Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Meta-Wiki Wikispecies Wikibooks Wikidata Wikinews Wikiquote Wikisource Wikiversity Wikivoyage Languages Simple English العربية Bahasa Indonesia Bahasa Melayu Bosanski Български Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 עברית Hrvatski Italiano ქართული Latviešu Lietuvių Magyar Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Polski Português Română Русский Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska ไทย Tiếng Việt Türkçe Українська 中文 This page was last modified on 26 December 2015, at 10:03. Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view