Product bundling - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Product bundling From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to: navigation, search For the Canadian television sitcom, see Package Deal (TV Series). This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (July 2008) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) Competition law Basic concepts History of competition law Monopoly Coercive monopoly Natural monopoly Barriers to entry Herfindahl–Hirschman Index Market concentration Market power SSNIP test Relevant market Merger control Anti-competitive practices Monopolization Collusion Formation of cartels Price fixing Bid rigging Product bundling and tying Refusal to deal Group boycott Essential facilities Exclusive dealing Dividing territories Conscious parallelism Predatory pricing Misuse of patents and copyrights Enforcement authorities and organizations International Competition Network List of competition regulators This box: view talk edit In marketing, product bundling is offering several products for sale as one combined product. It is a common feature in many imperfectly competitive product markets. Industries engaged in the practice include telecommunications, financial services, health care, and information.[1] A software bundle might include a word processor, spreadsheet, and presentation program into a single office suite. The cable television industry often bundles channels into a single tier. The fast food industry combines separate food items into a complete meal. A bundle of products may be called a package deal, a compilation or an anthology. Most firms are multi-product companies faced with the decision whether to sell products or services separately at individual prices or whether combinations of products should be marketed in the form of "bundles" for which a "bundle price" is asked. Price bundling plays an increasingly important role in many industries (e.g. banking, insurance, software, automotive) and some companies even build their business strategies on bundling. In a bundle pricing, companies sell a package or set of goods or services for a lower price than they would charge if the customer bought all of them separately. Pursuing a bundle pricing strategy allows you to increase your profit by giving customers a discount. Contents 1 Rationale 2 Varieties of bundling 3 Bundled software 4 Bundling, market power, and competitiveness 4.1 United States v. Microsoft 5 See also 6 Notes Rationale[edit] Bundling is most successful when: There are economies of scale in production. There are economies of scope in distribution. Marginal costs of bundling are low. Production set-up costs are high. Customer acquisition costs are high. Consumers appreciate the resulting simplification of the purchase decision and benefit from the joint performance of the combined product. Consumers have heterogeneous demands and such demands for different parts of the bundle product are inversely correlated. For example, assume consumer A values word processor at $100 and spreadsheet processor at $60, while consumer B values word processor at $60 and spreadsheet at $100. Seller can generate maximum revenue of only $240 by setting $60 price for each product—both consumers will buy both products. Revenue cannot be increased without bundling because as seller increases the price above $60 for one of the goods, one of the consumers will refuse to buy it. With bundling, seller can generate revenue of $320 by bundling the products together and selling the bundle at $160. Product bundling is most suitable for high volume and high margin (i.e., low marginal cost) products. Research by Yannis Bakos and Erik Brynjolfsson found that bundling was particularly effective for digital "information goods" with close to zero marginal cost, and could enable a bundler with an inferior collection of products to drive even superior quality goods out of the market place.[2][3] Venkatesh and Mahajan reviewed the research on bundle design and pricing in 2009.[4] Varieties of bundling[edit] Pure bundling occurs when a consumer can only purchase the entire bundle or nothing, mixed bundling occurs when consumers are offered a choice between purchasing the entire bundle or one of the separate parts of the bundle. Pure bundling can be further divided into two cases: in joint bundling, the two products are offered together for one bundled price, and, in leader bundling, a leader product is offered for discount if purchased with a non-leader product. Mixed-leader bundling is a variant of leader bundling with the added possibility of buying the leader product on its own. Bundling in political economy is a type of product bundling in which the product is a candidate in an election who markets his bundle of attributes and positions to the voters. Bundled software[edit] In the software industry, bundled software is software distributed with another product such as a piece of computer hardware or other electronic device, or a group of software packages which are sold together. Software which is pre-installed on a new computer is an example of bundled software. A pack-in game is a form of bundled software. Bundling, market power, and competitiveness[edit] In oligopolistic and monopolistic industries, product bundling can be seen as an unfair use of market power because it limits the choices available to the consumer. In these cases it is typically called product tying. Some forms of product bundling have been subject to litigation regarding abuses of market share. United States v. Microsoft[edit] United States v. Microsoft was a set of civil actions filed against Microsoft Corporation pursuant to the Sherman Antitrust Act of 1890 Sections 1 and 2 on May 18, 1998 by the United States Department of Justice (DOJ) and 20 states. Joel I. Klein was the lead prosecutor. The plaintiffs alleged that Microsoft abused monopoly power on Intel-based personal computers in its handling of operating system sales and web browser sales. The issue central to the case was whether Microsoft was allowed to bundle its flagship Internet Explorer (IE) web browser software with its Microsoft Windows operating system. Bundling them together is alleged to have been responsible for Microsoft's victory in the browser wars as every Windows user had a copy of Internet Explorer. See also[edit] Competition law Compilation album Freebie marketing History of IBM § 1969: Antitrust, the Unbundling of software and services Local loop unbundling Marketing co-operation Multicart Package holiday Price discrimination Product management Shovelware Software bloat Tying (commerce) Notes[edit] ^ Adams, Yellen, W, J (August 1976). "Commodity bundling and the burden of monopoly". Quarterly Journal of Economics 90 (3): 475–498. doi:10.2307/1886045.  ^ Bakos, Yannis; Brynjolfsson, Erik (1999). "Bundling Information Goods: Pricing, Profits, and Efficiency". Management Science 45 (12): 1613–1630. doi:10.1287/mnsc.45.12.1613. JSTOR 2634781.  ^ Bakos, Yannis; Brynjolfsson, Erik (2000). "Bundling and Competition on the Internet". Marketing Science 19 (1): 63–82. doi:10.1287/mksc.19.1.63.15182. JSTOR 193259.  ^ Venkatesh, R. and Vijay Mahajan (2009). Vithala R. Rao, ed. "The Design and Pricing of Bundles: A Review of Normative Guidelines and Practical Approaches" (PDF). Handbook of Pricing Research in Marketing (Northampton, MA: Edward Elgar Publishing Company): 232–257. Retrieved 2012-12-10.  v t e Software distribution Licenses Beerware Floating licensing Free Free and open-source Freely redistributable Open source Proprietary Public domain Compensation models Commercial software Retail software Crowdfunding Freemium Freeware Adware Donationware Careware Pay what you want Open core Postcardware Shareware Nagware Delivery methods Digital distribution File sharing On-premises Pre-installed Product bundling Retail software Software as a service Deceptive and/or illicit Unwanted software bundling Malware (Spyware Trojan horse Worm) Ransomware Scareware Shovelware Vaporware Software release life cycle Abandonware End-of-life Long-term support Software maintenance Software maintainer Software publisher Copy protection Digital rights management Software protection dongle Hardware restrictions License manager Product activation Product key Software copyright Software patent Torrent poisoning Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Product_bundling&oldid=711379982" Categories: Marketing Product management Types of marketing Software distribution Hidden categories: Articles needing additional references from July 2008 All articles needing additional references Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Article Talk Variants Views Read Edit View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Featured content Current events Random article Donate to Wikipedia Wikipedia store Interaction Help About Wikipedia Community portal Recent changes Contact page Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Cite this page Print/export Create a book Download as PDF Printable version Languages العربية Azərbaycanca Deutsch Euskara Français Italiano Қазақша 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Русский Svenska 中文 Edit links This page was last modified on 22 March 2016, at 14:58. Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view