Southeast Europe - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Southeast Europe From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia   (Redirected from Southeastern Europe) Jump to: navigation, search Geographic features of southeast Europe The European regional grouping according to The World Factbook:   Central Europe   Eastern Europe   Southeastern Europe Southeast Europe or southeastern Europe is a geographical region of Europe, consisting primarily of the Balkan peninsula. Sovereign states that are generally included in southeastern Europe are, in alphabetical order, Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Croatia, Cyprus, Greece, Kosovo[a], Macedonia, Moldova, Montenegro, Romania, Serbia, and partially Italy, Slovenia and Turkey. These boundaries can vary greatly due to political, economic, historical, cultural, and geographic considerations of the observer and as such are widely disputed. Contents 1 Definition 1.1 Balkans model 1.2 States in southeast Europe 1.3 Stability Pact for South Eastern Europe model 1.4 South East Europe Transnational Cooperation Program 2 See also 3 Notes 4 References Definition[edit] The first known use of the term "Southeast Europe" was by Austrian researcher Johann Georg von Hahn (1811–1869) as a broader term than the traditional "Balkans".[1] Balkans model[edit] Main article: Balkans The Balkan Peninsula, as defined by the Danube-Sava-Kupa line This concept is based on the boundaries of the Balkan peninsula. The countries that have been described as being entirely within the region are: Albania, Kosovo,[2] Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Macedonia and Montenegro.[3] Countries that are, at least partially, described to be within the region are: Croatia, Greece, Italy, Romania, Serbia, Slovenia and Turkey.[4] States in southeast Europe[edit]  Albania  Bosnia and Herzegovina  Bulgaria  Croatia[5][6][7]  Greece  Kosovo[a]  Macedonia  Moldova  Montenegro  Romania  Serbia  Slovenia Regions within other states  Italy Southern Italy, where the population has prehistoric genetic ties to the Balkans,[8] was part of the ancient Greek world, and where linguistic minorities speak various Balkan languages.  Turkey East Thrace, Turkey – the area immediately north of the Bosphorus, constituting approximately three per cent of Turkey's land area. East Thrace comprises Edirne Province, Kırklareli Province, Tekirdağ Province, and part of Istanbul Province. Stability Pact for South Eastern Europe model[edit] The Stability Pact for South Eastern Europe was an institution aimed at strengthening peace, democracy, human rights and economy in the countries of South Eastern Europe from 1999 to 2008. It was replaced by the Regional Cooperation Council (RCC) in February 2008. The RCC replaced the Stability Pact, which was driven more by outside partners such as the EU, the US, Japan and Turkey, and the countries included were: Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Croatia, Macedonia, Moldova, Montenegro, Romania, and Serbia. South East Europe Transnational Cooperation Program[edit] The South East Europe (SEE) program is a program set up within the framework of the Regional Policy's Territorial Cooperation Objective of the European Union in order to improve integration and competitiveness in the area. It had 235,6 million euro of funding available from 2007-2013.[9] See also[edit] Percentages agreement Regional Cooperation Council South East Europe Media Organisation Southeast European Cooperative Initiative Wikimedia Commons has media related to Southeast Europe. South-East European Cooperation Process Southeast European Times Stability Pact for South Eastern Europe Notes[edit] ^ a b Kosovo is the subject of a territorial dispute between the Republic of Kosovo and the Republic of Serbia. The Republic of Kosovo unilaterally declared independence on 17 February 2008, but Serbia continues to claim it as part of its own sovereign territory. The two governments began to normalise relations in 2013, as part of the Brussels Agreement. Kosovo has been recognised as an independent state by 108 out of 193 United Nations member states. References[edit] ^ Hösch, Nehring, Sundhaussen (Hrsg.), Lexikon zur Geschichte Südosteuropas, S. 663, ISBN 3-8252-8270-8 ^ Kosovo is the subject of a territorial dispute between the Republic of Kosovo and the Republic of Serbia. The Republic of Kosovo unilaterally declared independence on 17 February 2008, but Serbia continues to claim it as part of its own sovereign territory. The two governments began to normalise relations in 2013, as part of the Brussels Agreement. Kosovo has been recognised as an independent state by 108 out of 193 United Nations member states. ^ Istituto Geografico De Agostini, L'Enciclopedia Geografica – Vol.I – Italia, 2004, Ed. De Agostini p.78 ^ Jelavich, Barbara (1983). History of the Balkans: Eighteenth and nineteenth centuries. Cambridge University Press. p. 1. ISBN 978-0-521-27458-6.  ^ Armstrong, Werwick. Anderson, James (2007). "Borders in Central Europe: From Conflict to Cooperation". Geopolitics of European Union Enlargement: The Fortress Empire. Routledge. p. 165. ISBN 978-1-134-30132-4.  ^ Andrew Geddes,Charles Lees,Andrew Taylor : "The European Union and South East Europe: The Dynamics of Europeanization and multilevel goverance", 2013, Routledge ^ Klaus Liebscher, Josef Christl, Peter Mooslechner, Doris Ritzberger-Grünwald : "European Economic Integration and South-East Europe: Challenges and Prospects", 2005, Edward Elgar Publishing Limited ^ Most men in southern and central Italy possess Y-DNA from haplogroup J, which is predominantly found in southwest Asia, whereas most of those in northern Italy have haplogroup R1b, which is most often found in western Europe. (See, for instance: F. Brisighelli , V. Álvarez-Iglesias, M. Fondevila, A. Blanco-Verea, Á. Carracedo, V. L. Pascali, C. Capelli, & A. Salas, 2012, “Uniparental Markers of Contemporary Italian Population Reveals Details on Its Pre-Roman Heritage”, PLOS (2 May 2015). ^ www.southeast-europe.net/en v t e Balkan Peninsula countries Geographically fully located Albania Bosnia and Herzegovina Bulgaria Greece Kosovo1 Macedonia Montenegro Significantly located Croatia Serbia Mostly outside of the peninsula Italy Romania Slovenia Turkey See also Balkans Southeast Europe History of the Balkans Balkan languages (Sprachbund) Balkanization 1 Declared independence from Serbia on 17 February 2008 and is recognised by 108 United Nations member states. v t e Regions of the world Africa Mediterranean Saharan Northern  Greater Middle East Maghreb Middle East Sub-Saharan Western East Great Lakes Central Southern Horn Islands North America Northern Pacific Northwest Northeastern United States New England Midwest Mid-Atlantic Western United States Southwest Mountain States South Central United States Southern United States East Coast West Coast Bible Belt Appalachia Great Lakes Eastern Canada Western Canada Northern Canada Atlantic Canada Northern Mexico Aridoamerica Caribbean West Indies Central Middle Mesoamerica Anglo French Latin (Hispanic) South America Southern Northern (Guianan states) Western West Indies Patagonia Amazon Latin (Hispanic) Asia Central Aral Sea Aralkum Desert Caspian Sea Dead Sea Far East Russian Eastern  Northeastern Inner Asia Southeastern Mainland Maritime Northern Siberia Southern Indian subcontinent Western Caucasus Transcaucasia Greater Middle East Middle East Near East Mediterranean Asia-Pacific Europe Central Northern Nordic Northwestern Scandinavia Scandinavian Peninsula Baltic Eastern Southeastern Balkans North Caucasus Southern Russia European Russia Middle East Southern Iberia Southeastern Mediterranean Western Northwestern British Isles Germanic Romance Celtic Slavic Oceania Australasia Australia New Guinea Zealandia Pacific Islands Micronesia Melanesia Polynesia Polar Antarctic Arctic Oceans World (Sea) Arctic Atlantic Indian Pacific Great Barrier Reef Mariana Trench Ring of Fire Southern Convergence List of seas Continents of the world / List of seas / Physical Earth Authority control WorldCat Identities VIAF: 238996100 GND: 4058449-5 Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Southeast_Europe&oldid=718816266" Categories: Southeastern Europe Regions of Europe Eastern Europe Southern Europe Hidden categories: Commons category with page title different than on Wikidata Wikipedia articles with VIAF identifiers Wikipedia articles with GND identifiers Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Article Talk Variants Views Read Edit View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Featured content Current events Random article Donate to Wikipedia Wikipedia store Interaction Help About Wikipedia Community portal Recent changes Contact page Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Cite this page Print/export Create a book Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Languages Afrikaans العربية Boarisch Bosanski Brezhoneg Čeština Cymraeg Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Esperanto Français 한국어 Հայերեն Hrvatski Íslenska Lietuvių Magyar Македонски Nederlands 日本語 Nordfriisk ਪੰਜਾਬੀ Română Shqip Slovenčina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Svenska Українська اردو Winaray Yorùbá 中文 Edit links This page was last modified on 5 May 2016, at 20:08. Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view