Central Intelligence Agency - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Central Intelligence Agency From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to: navigation, search "CIA" redirects here. For other uses, see CIA (disambiguation). Central Intelligence Agency Seal of the Central Intelligence Agency Flag of the Central Intelligence Agency Agency overview Formed September 18, 1947; 68 years ago (1947-09-18) Preceding agency Office of Strategic Services[1] Headquarters George Bush Center for Intelligence Langley, Fairfax County, Virginia, United States Motto "The Work of a Nation. The Center of Intelligence." Unofficial motto: "And you shall know the truth and the truth shall make you free." (John 8:32)[2] Employees 21,575 (estimate)[3] Annual budget $15 billion (as of 2013[update])[3][4][5] Agency executives John O. Brennan, Director David S. Cohen, Deputy Director Parent agency None (independent) Website www.CIA.gov The Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) is a civilian foreign intelligence service of the U.S. Government, tasked with gathering, processing and analyzing national security information from around the world, primarily through the use of human intelligence (HUMINT). As one of the principal members of the U.S. Intelligence Community (IC), the CIA reports to the Director of National Intelligence and is primarily focused on providing intelligence for the President and his Cabinet. Unlike the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI), which is a domestic security service, CIA has no law enforcement function and is mainly focused on overseas intelligence gathering, with only limited domestic collection. Though it is not the only U.S. government agency specializing in HUMINT, CIA serves as the national manager for coordination and deconfliction of HUMINT activities across the entire intelligence community. Moreover, CIA is the only agency authorized by law to carry out and oversee covert action on behalf of the President, unless the President determines that another agency is better suited for carrying out such action.[6][7][8][9] It can, for example, exert foreign political influence through its tactical divisions, such as the Special Activities Division.[10] Before the Intelligence Reform and Terrorism Prevention Act, CIA Director concurrently served as the head of the Intelligence Community; today these functions and authorities reside with the Director of National Intelligence. Despite transferring some of its powers to the DNI, the CIA has grown in size as a result of the September 11 terrorist attacks. In 2013, The Washington Post reported that in fiscal year 2010, the CIA had the largest budget of all IC agencies, exceeding previous estimates.[3][11] The CIA has increasingly expanded its roles, including covert paramilitary operations.[3] One of its largest divisions, the Information Operations Center (IOC), has shifted focus from counter-terrorism to offensive cyber-operations.[12] While the CIA has had some recent accomplishments, such as locating Osama bin Laden and taking part in the successful Operation Neptune Spear, it has also been involved in controversial programs such as extraordinary rendition and enhanced interrogation techniques. Contents 1 Purpose 2 Organizational structure 2.1 Executive Office 2.2 Directorate of Analysis 2.3 Directorate of Operations 2.4 Directorate of Science and Technology 2.5 Directorate of Support 3 Training 4 Budget 5 Employees 5.1 Polygraphing 6 Relationship with other intelligence agencies 6.1 U.S. agencies 6.2 Foreign intelligence services 7 History 7.1 Immediate predecessors 7.2 National Security Act 7.3 Intelligence vs. action 7.4 Korean War 7.5 1953 Iranian coup d'état 7.6 1954 Guatemalan coup d'état 7.7 Syria 7.8 Indonesia 7.9 Congo 7.10 Gary Powers U-2 shootdown 7.11 Dominican Republic 7.12 Bay of Pigs 7.13 Cuban Missile Crisis 7.14 Early Cold War, 1953–1966 7.15 Indochina, Tibet and the Vietnam War (1954–1975) 7.15.1 Johnson 7.16 Nixon 7.17 Congressional Investigations 7.18 Counter-Espionage Against the USSR 7.19 Chad 7.20 Afghanistan 7.21 Iran Contra 7.21.1 Hostage taking 7.21.1.1 Lebanon 7.21.1.2 Nicaragua 7.21.1.3 Hostage trades 7.22 Poland 1980–89 7.23 Operation Desert Storm 7.24 Fall of the USSR 7.25 President Clinton 7.25.1 Somalia 7.25.2 Aldrich Ames 7.26 Osama Bin Laden 7.26.1 Al-Qaeda and the "Global War on Terrorism" 7.26.2 Use of vaccination programs 7.27 Failures in intelligence analysis 7.28 Abuses of CIA authority, 1970s–1990s 7.29 Iraq War 7.30 2004, DNI takes over CIA top-level functions 7.31 Operation Neptune Spear 7.32 Syrian Civil War 7.33 Reorganization 8 Open Source Intelligence 9 Outsourcing and privatization 10 Controversies 10.1 Extraordinary rendition 10.2 Security failures 10.3 Counterintelligence failures 10.4 Human rights concerns 10.5 External investigations and document releases 10.6 Influencing public opinion and law enforcement 10.7 Drug trafficking 10.8 Alleged lying to Congress 10.8.1 Covert programs hidden from Congress 10.8.2 Intelligence Committee investigation 10.9 Improper search of computers used by Senate investigators 11 In fiction 12 See also 13 Notes 14 References 15 External links Purpose When the CIA was created, its purpose was to create a clearinghouse for foreign policy intelligence and analysis. Today its primary purpose is to collect, analyze, evaluate, and disseminate foreign intelligence, and to perform covert actions. According to its fiscal 2013 budget, the CIA has five priorities:[3] Counterterrorism, the top priority, given the ongoing Global War on Terror. Nonproliferation of nuclear and other weapons of mass destruction, with North Korea described as perhaps the most difficult target. Warning/informing American leaders of important overseas events, with Pakistan described as an "intractable target". Counterintelligence, with China, Russia, Iran, Cuba, and Israel described as "priority" targets. Cyber intelligence. Organizational structure John Brennan, the current director of the Central Intelligence Agency Chart showing the organization of the Central Intelligence Agency. Main article: Organizational structure of the Central Intelligence Agency The CIA has an executive office and five major directorates: The Directorate of Digital Innovation The Directorate of Analysis The Directorate of Operations The Directorate of Support The Directorate of Science and Technology Executive Office The Director of the Central Intelligence Agency (D/CIA) reports directly to the Director of National Intelligence (DNI); in practice, the director deals with the DNI, Congress, and the White House, while the Deputy Director is the internal executive. The Executive Office also supports the U.S. military by providing it with information it gathers, receiving information from military intelligence organizations, and cooperating on field activities. The Executive Director is in charge of the day to day operation of the CIA, and each branch of the service has its own Director.[13] The Associate Director of military affairs, a senior military officer, manages the relationship between the CIA and the Unified Combatant Commands, who produce regional/operational intelligence and consume national intelligence.[14][15] Directorate of Analysis Aerial view of the Central Intelligence Agency headquarters, Langley, Virginia The Directorate of Analysis produces all-source intelligence investigation on key foreign and intercontinental issues relating to powerful and sometimes anti-government sensitive topics.[16] It has four regional analytic groups, six groups for transnational issues, and three focus on policy, collection, and staff support.[17] There is an office dedicated to Iraq, and regional analytical Offices covering the Near Eastern and South Asian Analysis, the Office of Russian and European Analysis, and the Office of Asian Pacific, Asian Pacific, Latin American, and African Analysis and African Analysis. Directorate of Operations Main article: National Clandestine Service The Directorate of Operations is responsible for collecting foreign intelligence, mainly from clandestine HUMINT sources, and covert action. The name reflects its role as the coordinator of human intelligence activities among other elements of the wider U.S. intelligence community with their own HUMINT operations. This Directorate was created in an attempt to end years of rivalry over influence, philosophy and budget between the United States Department of Defense (DOD) and the CIA. In spite of this, the Department of Defense recently organized its own global clandestine intelligence service, the Defense Clandestine Service (DCS),[18] under the Defense Intelligence Agency (DIA). This Directorate is organized by geographic regions and issues, but the precise present organization of this Directorate is classified.[19] Directorate of Science and Technology Main article: Directorate of Science & Technology The Directorate of Science & Technology was established to research, create, and manage technical collection disciplines and equipment. Many of its innovations were transferred to other intelligence organizations, or, as they became more overt, to the military services. For example, the development of the U-2 high-altitude reconnaissance aircraft was done in cooperation with the United States Air Force. The U-2's original mission was clandestine imagery intelligence over denied areas such as the Soviet Union.[20] It was subsequently provided with signals intelligence and measurement and signature intelligence capabilities, and is now operated by the Air Force. Imagery intelligence collected by the U-2 and reconnaissance satellites was analyzed by a DS&T organization called the National Photointerpretation Center (NPIC), which had analysts from both the CIA and the military services. Subsequently, NPIC was transferred to the National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency (NGA). Directorate of Support Main article: Directorate of Support The Directorate of Support has organizational and administrative functions to significant units including: The Office of Security The Office of Communications The Office of Information Technology Training Further information: CIA University, Sherman Kent School for Intelligence Analysis, Camp Peary, Harvey Point and Warrenton Training Center The CIA established its first training facility, the Office of Training and Education, in 1950. Following the end of the Cold War, the CIA's training budget was slashed, which had a negative effect on employee retention.[21][22] In response, Director of Central Intelligence George Tenet established CIA University in 2002.[21][23] CIA University holds between 200 and 300 courses each year, training both new hires and experienced intelligence officers, as well as CIA support staff.[21][22] The facility works in partnership with the National Intelligence University, and includes the Sherman Kent School for Intelligence Analysis, the Directorate of Analysis' component of the university.[23][24][25] For later stage training of student operations officers, there is at least one classified training area at Camp Peary, near Williamsburg, Virginia. Students are selected, and their progress evaluated, in ways derived from the OSS, published as the book Assessment of Men, Selection of Personnel for the Office of Strategic Services.[26] Additional mission training is conducted at Harvey Point, North Carolina.[27] The primary training facility for the Office of Communications is Warrenton Training Center, located near Warrenton, Virginia. The facility was established in 1951 and has been used by the CIA since at least 1955.[28][29] Budget Main article: United States intelligence budget Details of the overall United States intelligence budget are classified.[3] Under the Central Intelligence Agency Act of 1949, the Director of Central Intelligence is the only federal government employee who can spend "un-vouchered" government money.[30] The government has disclosed a total figure for all non-military intelligence spending since 2007; the fiscal 2013 figure is $52.6 billion. According to the 2013 mass surveillance disclosures, the CIA's fiscal 2013 budget is $14.7 billion, 28% of the total and almost 50% more than the budget of the National Security Agency. CIA's HUMINT budget is $2.3 billion, the SIGINT budget is $1.7 billion, and spending for security and logistics of CIA missions is $2.5 billion. "Covert action programs", including a variety of activities such as the CIA's drone fleet and anti-Iranian nuclear program activities, accounts for $2.6 billion.[3] There were numerous previous attempts to obtain general information about the budget.[31] As a result, it was revealed that CIA's annual budget in Fiscal Year 1963 was US $550 million (inflation-adjusted US$ 4.3 billion in 2016),[32] and the overall intelligence budget in FY 1997 was US $26.6 billion (inflation-adjusted US$ 39.2 billion in 2016).[33] There have been accidental disclosures; for instance, Mary Margaret Graham, a former CIA official and deputy director of national intelligence for collection in 2005, said that the annual intelligence budget was $44 billion,[34] and in 1994 Congress accidentally published a budget of $43.4 billion (in 2012 dollars) in 1994 for the non-military National Intelligence Program, including $4.8 billion for the CIA.[3] After the Marshall Plan was approved, appropriating $13.7 billion over five years, 5% of those funds or $685 million were made available to the CIA.[35] Employees Polygraphing Robert Baer, a CNN analyst and former CIA operative, stated that normally a CIA employee undergoes a polygraph examination every three to four years.[36] Relationship with other intelligence agencies Part of a series on Global surveillance Disclosures Origins Pre-2013 2013–present Reactions Systems XKeyscore PRISM ECHELON Carnivore DISHFIRE STONEGHOST Tempora Frenchelon Fairview MYSTIC DCSN Boundless Informant BULLRUN PINWALE Stingray Agencies Five Eyes BND DGSE FSB MSS People Michael S. Rogers Keith Alexander James Bamford James Clapper Duncan Campbell Edward Snowden Russ Tice Barack Obama Julian Assange Places The Doughnut Fort Meade Menwith Hill Pine Gap Southern Cross Cable Utah Data Center Bad Aibling Station Dagger Complex Laws Five Eyes UKUSA Agreement Lustre U.S. USA Freedom Act FISA amendments EU Data Retention Directive Data Protection Directive Proposed changes U.S. FISA Improvements Act Other proposals Concepts Mass surveillance Culture of fear Secure communication SIGINT Call detail record Surveillance issues in smart cities Related topics Espionage Intelligence agency Cryptography Tor VPNs Human rights Privacy Liberty Satellites Stop Watching Us Mass surveillance portal v t e The CIA acts as the primary US HUMINT and general analytic agency, under the Director of National Intelligence, who directs or coordinates the 16 member organizations of the United States Intelligence Community. In addition, it obtains information from other U.S. government intelligence agencies, commercial information sources, and foreign intelligence services.[citation needed] U.S. agencies CIA employees form part of the National Reconnaissance Office (NRO) workforce, originally created as a joint office of the CIA and US Air Force to operate the spy satellites of the US military. The Special Collections Service is a joint CIA and National Security Agency (NSA) office that conducts clandestine electronic surveillance in embassies and hostile territory throughout the world. Foreign intelligence services The role and functions of the CIA are roughly equivalent to those of the United Kingdom's Secret Intelligence Service (the SIS or MI6), the Australian Secret Intelligence Service (ASIS), the Egyptian General Intelligence Service, the Russian Foreign Intelligence Service (Sluzhba Vneshney Razvedki) (SVR), the Indian Research and Analysis Wing (RAW), the Pakistani Inter-Services Intelligence (ISI), the French foreign intelligence service Direction Générale de la Sécurité Extérieure (DGSE) and Israel's Mossad. While the preceding agencies both collect and analyze information, some like the U.S. State Department's Bureau of Intelligence and Research are purely analytical agencies.[citation needed] The closest links of the U.S. IC to other foreign intelligence agencies are to Anglophone countries: Australia, Canada, New Zealand, and the United Kingdom. There is a special communications marking that signals that intelligence-related messages can be shared with these four countries.[37] An indication of the United States' close operational cooperation is the creation of a new message distribution label within the main U.S. military communications network. Previously, the marking of NOFORN (i.e., No Foreign Nationals) required the originator to specify which, if any, non-U.S. countries could receive the information. A new handling caveat, USA/AUS/CAN/GBR/NZL Five Eyes, used primarily on intelligence messages, gives an easier way to indicate that the material can be shared with Australia, Canada, United Kingdom, and New Zealand. The task of the division called "Verbindungsstelle 61" of the German Bundesnachrichtendienst is keeping contact to the CIA office in Wiesbaden.[38] Ireland's Directorate of Military Intelligence liaises with the CIA, although it is not a member of the Five Eyes.[39] History This section is too long. Consider splitting it into new pages, adding subheadings, or condensing it. (April 2015) The 113 stars on the CIA Memorial Wall in the original CIA headquarters, each representing a CIA officer killed in action. Main article: History of the Central Intelligence Agency The Central Intelligence Agency was created on 26 July 1947, when Harry S. Truman signed the National Security Act into law. A major impetus for the creation of the CIA was the unforeseen attack on Pearl Harbor. In addition, towards the end of World War II the U.S. government felt the need for a group to coordinate intelligence efforts. Immediate predecessors The success of the British Commandos during World War II prompted U.S. President Franklin D. Roosevelt to authorize the creation of an intelligence service modeled after the British Secret Intelligence Service (MI6), and Special Operations Executive. This led to the creation of the Office of Strategic Services (OSS). On September 20, 1945, shortly after the end of World War II, Harry S. Truman signed an executive order dissolving the OSS, and by October 1945 its functions had been divided between the Departments of State and War. The division lasted only a few months. The first public mention of the "Central Intelligence Agency" appeared on a command-restructuring proposal presented by Jim Forrestal and Arthur Radford to the U.S. Senate Military Affairs Committee at the end of 1945.[40] Despite opposition from the military establishment, the United States Department of State and the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI),[41] Truman established the National Intelligence Authority[42] in January 1946, which was the direct predecessor of the CIA.[43] Its operational extension was known as the Central Intelligence Group (CIG)[44] National Security Act Lawrence Houston, head counsel of the SSU, CIG, and, later CIA, was a principle draftsman of the National Security Act of 1947[45][46] which dissolved the NIA and the CIG, and established both the National Security Council and the Central Intelligence Agency.[44][47] In 1949, Houston would help draft the Central Intelligence Agency Act, (Public law 81-110) which authorized the agency to use confidential fiscal and administrative procedures, and exempted it from most limitations on the use of Federal funds. It also exempted the CIA from having to disclose its "organization, functions, officials, titles, salaries, or numbers of personnel employed." It created the program "PL-110", to handle defectors and other "essential aliens" who fell outside normal immigration procedures.[48][49] Intelligence vs. action At the outset of the Korean War the CIA still only had a few thousand employees, a thousand of whom worked in analysis. Intelligence primarily came from the Office of Reports and Estimates, which drew its reports from a daily take of State Department telegrams, military dispatches, and other public documents. The CIA still lacked its own intelligence gathering abilities.[50] On 21 August 1950, shortly after the invasion of South Korea, Truman announced Walter Bedell Smith as the new Director of the CIA to correct what was seen as a grave failure of Intelligence.[clarification needed][50] The CIA had different demands placed on it by the different bodies overseeing it. Truman wanted a centralized group to organize the information that reached him,[51][52] the Department of Defense wanted military intelligence and covert action, and the State Department wanted to create global political change favorable to the US. Thus the two areas of responsibility for the CIA were covert action and covert intelligence. One of the main targets for intelligence gathering was the Soviet Union, which had also been a priority of the CIA's predecessors.[51][52][53] US army general Hoyt Vandenberg, the CIG's second director, created the Office of Special Operations (OSO), as well as the Office of Reports and Estimates (ORE).[52] Initially the OSO was tasked with spying and subversion overseas with a budget of $15 million, the largesse of a small number of patrons in congress. Vandenberg's goals were much like the ones set out by his predecessor; finding out "everything about the Soviet forces in Eastern and Central Europe - their movements, their capabilities, and their intentions."[54] This task fell to the 228 overseas personnel covering Germany, Austria, Switzerland, Poland, Czechoslovakia, and Hungary. On 18 June 1948, the National Security Council issued Directive 10/2[55] calling for covert action against the USSR,[56] and granting the authority to carry out covert operations against "hostile foreign states or groups" that could, if needed, be denied by the U.S. government. To this end, the Office of Policy Coordination was created inside the new CIA. The OPC was quite unique; Frank Wisner, the head of the OPC, answered not to the CIA Director, but to the secretaries of defense, state, and the NSC, and the OPC's actions were a secret even from the head of the CIA. Most CIA stations had two station chiefs, one working for the OSO, and one working for the OPC.[57] The early track record of the CIA was poor, with the agency unable to provide sufficient intelligence about the Soviet takeovers of Romania and Czechoslovakia, the Soviet blockade of Berlin, and the Soviet atomic bomb project. In particular, the agency failed to predict the Chinese entry into the Korean War with 300,000 troops.[58][59] The famous double agent Kim Philby was the British liaison to American Central Intelligence. Through him the CIA coordinated hundreds of airdrops inside the iron curtain, all compromised by Philby. Arlington Hall, the nerve center of CIA cryptanalysisl was compromised by Bill Weisband, a Russian translator and Soviet spy.[60] The CIA would reuse the tactic of dropping plant agents behind enemy lines by parachute again on China, and North Korea. This too would be fruitless. However, the CIA was successful in influencing the 1948 Italian election in favor of the Christian Democrats.[61][62] The $200 million Exchange Stabilization Fund, earmarked for the reconstruction of Europe, was used to pay wealthy Americans of Italian heritage. Cash was then distributed to Catholic Action, the Vatican's political arm, and directly to Italian politicians. This tactic of using its large fund to purchase elections was frequently repeated in the subsequent years.[63] Korean War At the beginning of the Korean war, CIA officer Hans Tofte claimed to have turned a thousand North Korean expatriates into a guerrilla force tasked with infiltration, guerrilla warfare, and pilot rescue.[64] In 1952 the CIA sent 1,500 more expatriate agents north. Seoul station chief Albert Haney would openly celebrate the capabilities of those agents, and the information they sent.[64] In September 1952 Haney was replaced by John Limond Hart, a Europe veteran with a vivid memory for bitter experiences of misinformation.[64] Hart was suspicious of the parade of successes reported by Tofte and Haney and launched an investigation which determined that the entirety of the information supplied by the Korean sources was false or misleading.[65] After the war, internal reviews by the CIA would corroborate Hart's findings. The CIA's Seoul station had 200 officers, but not a single speaker of Korean.[65] Hart reported to Washington that Seoul station was hopeless, and could not be salvaged. Loftus Becker, Deputy Director of Intelligence, was sent personally to tell Hart that the CIA had to keep the station open to save face. Becker returned to Washington, pronounced the situation to be "hopeless", and that, after touring the CIA's Far East operations, the CIA's ability to gather intelligence in the far east was "almost negligible".[65] He then resigned. Air Force Colonel James Kallis stated that CIA director Allen Dulles continued to praise the CIA's Korean force, despite knowing that they were under enemy control.[66] When China entered the war in 1952, the CIA attempted a number of subversive operations in the country, all of which failed due to the presence of double agents. Millions of dollars were spent in these efforts.[67] These included a team of young CIA officers airdropped into to China who were ambushed, and CIA funds being used to set up a global heroin empire in Burma's Golden Triangle following a betrayal by another double agent.[67] 1953 Iranian coup d'état Main article: 1953 Iranian coup d'état In 1951, Mohammad Mosaddegh, a member of the National Front was elected Iranian prime-minister.[68] As prime minister, he nationalized the Anglo-Iranian Oil Company which his predecessor had supported. Nationalization of the British funded Iranian oil industry, including the largest oil refinery in the world, was disastrous for Mossadeq. A British naval embargo shuttered the British oil facilities, which Iran had no skilled workers to operate. In '52 Mosaddegh bucked against royal refusal to approve his Minister of War, and resigned in protest. The National Front took to the streets in protest. Fearing a loss of control the military pulled its troops back five days later, and the Shah gave in to Mosaddegh's demands. Mosaddegh quickly replaced military leaders loyal to the Shah with those loyal to him, giving him personal control over the military. Mosaddegh would take 6 months of emergency powers, giving him the power to unilaterally pass legislation. When that expired, his powers were extended for another year. In 1953 Mossadeq dismissed parliament and assumed dictatorial powers. This power grab triggered the Shah to exercise his constitutional right to dismiss Mosaddegh. Mosaddegh launched a military coup as the Shah fled the country. As was typical of CIA operations, CIA interventions were preceded by radio announcements on July 7, 1953 made by the CIA's intended victim by way of operational leaks.[69] On August 19, a CIA paid mob led by Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini would spark what a US embassy officer called "an almost spontaneous revolution"[70] but Mosaddegh was protected by his new inner military circle, and the CIA had been unable to get any sway within the Iranian military. Their chosen man, former general Fazlollah Zahedi, had no troops to call on.[69] General McClure, commander of the American military assistance advisory group, would get his second star buying the loyalty of the Iranian officers he was training. An attack on his house would force Mossadegh to flee. He surrendered the next day, and his coup came to an end.[71] The end result would be a 60/40 oil profit split in favor of Iran (possibly similar to agreements with Saudi Arabia and Venezuela).[68] [clarification needed] 1954 Guatemalan coup d'état Main article: 1954 Guatemalan coup d'état The return of the Shah to power, and the impression, cultivated by Allen Dulles, that an effective CIA had been able to guide that nation to friendly and stable relations with the west triggered planning for Operation PBSUCCESS, a plan to overthrow Guatemalan President Jacobo Arbenz.[72] The plan was exposed in major newspapers before it happened after a CIA agent left plans for the coup in his Guatemala City hotel room.[73] The Guatemalan Revolution of 1944-54 overthrew the U.S. backed dictator Jorge Ubico and brought a democratically elected government to power. The government began an ambitious agrarian reform program attempting to grant land to millions of landless peasants. This program threatened the land holdings of the United Fruit Company, who lobbied for a coup by portraying these reforms as communist. On 18 June 1954, Carlos Castillo Armas led 480 CIA trained men across the border from Honduras into Guatemala. The weapons had also come from the CIA.[74] The CIA also mounted a psychological campaign to convince the Guatemalan people and government that Armas' victory was a fait accompli, the largest part of which was a radio broadcast entitled "The Voice of Liberation" which announced that Guatemalan exiles led by Castillo Armas were shortly about to liberate the country.[74] On 25 June, a CIA plane bombed Guatemala City, destroying the government's main oil reserves. Árbenz ordered the army to distribute weapons to local peasants and workers.[75] The army refused, forcing Jacobo Árbenz's resignation on 27 June 1954. Árbenz handed over power to Colonel Carlos Enrique Diaz.[75] The CIA then orchestrated a series of power transfers that ended with the confirmation of Castillo Armas as president in July 1954.[75] Armas was the first in a series of military dictators that would rule the country, triggering the brutal Guatemalan Civil War in which some 200,000 people were killed, mostly by the U.S. backed military.[76][77][78][79][80] The public revelation of the coup helped popularize the political science term "Banana republic", coined by the American writer O. Henry in his 1904 book Cabbages and Kings (literature). Syria In 1949, Colonel Adib Shishakli rose to power in Syria in a CIA-backed coup. Four years later, he would be overthrown by the military, Ba'athists, and communists. The CIA and MI6 started funding right wing members of the military, but suffered a large setback in the aftermath of the Suez Crisis. CIA Agent Rocky Stone, who had played a minor role in the Iranian Revolution, was working at the Damascus embassy as a diplomat, but was actually the station chief. Syrian officers on the CIA dole quickly appeared on television stating that they had received money from "corrupt and sinister Americans" "in an attempt to overthrow the legitimate government of Syria."[81] Syrian forces surrounded the embassy and rousted Agent Stone, who confessed and subsequently made history as the first American diplomat expelled from an Arab nation. This strengthened ties between Syria and Egypt, helping establish the United Arab Republic, and poisoning the well for the US for the foreseeable future.[81] The inability to deny the complicity of the U.S. government put this operation outside the charter of the CIA. Indonesia The charismatic leader of Indonesia was President Sukarno. His declaration of neutrality in the Cold War put the suspicions of the CIA on him. After Sukarno hosted Bandung Conference, promoting the Non-Aligned Movement, the Eisenhower White House responded with NSC 5518 authorizing "all feasible covert means" to move Indonesia into the Western sphere.[82] The CIA started funding the Masyumi Party. Sukarno confounded the CIA's Jakarta station, which had few speakers of native languages, and Al Ulmer, the new head of the CIA's Far East division, knew little about the country. Spooked by the communist PKI party moving into the third spot, the CIA's alarmed response was in contrast to that of the Ambassador, who maintained that Sukarno maintained an open door to the West. The US had no clear policy on Indonesia. Ike sent his special assistant for security operations, F. M. Dearborn Jr., to Jakarta. His report that there was great instability, and that the US lacked stable allies, reinforced the domino theory. Indonesia suffered from what he described as "subversion by democracy".[83] The CIA decided to attempt another military coup in Indonesia, where the Indonesian military was trained by the US, had a strong professional relationship with the US military, had a pro-American officer corps that strongly supported their government, and a strong belief in civilian control of the military, instilled partly by its close association with the US military.[84] Demonstrating an intolerance for dissent, the CIA instigated the transfer of the well-respected Ambassador Allison, who had a strong background in Asia, to Czechoslovakia. On September 25, 1957, Eisenhower ordered the CIA to start a revolution in Indonesia with the goal of regime change. Three days later, Blitz, a Soviet-controlled weekly in India, reported that the US was plotting to overthrow Sukarno. The story was picked up by the media in Indonesia. One of the first parts of the operation was an 11,500 ton US navy ship landing at Sumatra, delivering weapons for as many as 8,000 potential revolutionaries.[85] The delivery drew a crowd of spectators, and, little thought was given to plausible deniability. Counter to CIA predictions, the Indonesian military, with some planning assistance from their colleagues in the US military, the only people the CIA had successfully kept their involvement a secret from, reacted swiftly and effectively. The CIA described Agent Al Pope's bombing and strafing of Indonesia in a CIA B-26 to the President as attacks by "dissident planes". Pope's B-26 was shot down over Ambon, Indonesia on May 18, 1958, and he bailed out. When he was captured, the Indonesian military found his personnel records, after action reports, and his membership card for the officer's club at Clark Field. On March 9, Foster Dulles, the Secretary of State, and brother of DI Allen Dulles, made a public statement calling for a revolt against communist despotism under Sukarno. Three days later, the CIA reported to the White House that the Indonesian Army's actions against CIA-instigated revolution was suppressing communism.[86] After Indonesia, Eisenhower displayed mistrust of both the CIA and its Director, Allen Dulles. Dulles too displayed mistrust of the CIA itself. Abbot Smith, a CIA analyst who later became chief of the Office of National Estimates, said, "We had constructed for ourselves a picture of the USSR, and whatever happened had to be made to fit into this picture. Intelligence estimators can hardly commit a more abominable sin." Something reflected in the intelligence failure in Indonesia. On December 16, Eisenhower received a report from his intelligence board of consultants that said the agency was "incapable of making objective appraisals of its own intelligence information as well as its own operations."[87] Congo In the election of Patrice Lumumba, and his acceptance of Soviet support the CIA saw another possible Cuba. This view swayed the White House. Ike ordered that Lumumba be "eliminated". The CIA delivered a quarter of a million dollars to Joseph Mobutu, their favorite horse in the race. Mobutu delivered Lumumba to the Belgians, the former colonial masters of Congo, who executed him in short order.[88] Gary Powers U-2 shootdown Main article: 1960 U-2 incident Suspended from the ceiling of the glass enclosed atrium: three models of the U-2, Lockheed A-12, and D-21 drone. These models are exact replicas at one-sixth scale of the real planes. All three had photographic capabilities. The U-2 was one of the first espionage planes developed by the CIA. The A-12 set unheralded flight records. The D-21 drone was one of the first unmanned aircraft ever built. Lockheed Martin Corporation donated all three models to the CIA. After the Bomber Gap came the Missile Gap. Eisenhower wanted to use the U-2 to disprove the Missile Gap, but he had banned U-2 overflights of the USSR after meeting Secretary Khrushchev at Camp David. Another reason the President objected to the use of the U-2 was that, in the nuclear age, the intelligence he needed most was on their intentions, without which, the US would face a paralysis of intelligence. He was particularly worried that U-2 flights could be seen as preparations for first strike attacks. He had high hopes for an upcoming meeting with Khrushchev in Paris. Eisenhower finally gave into CIA pressure to authorize a 16 day window for flights, which was extended an additional six days because of poor weather. On May 1, 1960, the USSR shot down a U-2 flying over the Soviet territory. To Eisenhower, the ensuing coverup destroyed his perceived honesty, and his hope of leaving a legacy of thawing relations with Khrushchev. It would also mark the beginning of a long downward slide in the credibility of the Office of the President of the United States. Eisenhower later said that the U-2 coverup was the greatest regret of his Presidency.[89]:160 Dominican Republic The human rights abuses of Generalissimo Rafael Trujillo had a history of more than 3 decades, but in August 1960 the United States severed diplomatic relations. The CIA's Special group had decided to arm Dominicans in hopes of an assassination. The CIA had dispersed three rifles, and three .38 revolvers, but things paused as Kennedy assumed office. An order approved by Kennedy resulted in the dispersal of four machine guns. Trujillo died from gunshot wounds two weeks later. In the aftermath Robert Kennedy wrote that the CIA had succeeded where it had failed many times in the past, but in the face of that success, it was caught flatfooted, having failed to plan what to do next.[90] Bay of Pigs Main article: Bay of Pigs invasion The CIA welcomed Fidel Castro on his visit to DC, and gave him a face to face briefing. The CIA hoped that Castro would bring about a friendly democratic government, and planned to curry his favor with money and guns. On December 11, 1959, a memo reached the DI's desk recommending Castro's "elimination". Dulles replaced the word "elimination" with "removal", and set the wheels in motion. By mid August 1960, Dick Bissell would seek, with the blessing of the CIA, to hire the Mafia to assassinate Castro.[91] At the same time, his men were working on a parallel plan, recruiting a Cuban exile to assassinate him. A little while later, the FBI advised the CIA that it would be impossible to overthrow Castro with these Cuban exiles. The Bay of Pigs Invasion was a failed military invasion of Cuba undertaken by the CIA-sponsored paramilitary group Brigade 2506 on 17 April 1961. A counter-revolutionary military, trained and funded by the CIA, Brigade 2506 fronted the armed wing of the Democratic Revolutionary Front (DRF) and intended to overthrow the increasingly communist government of Fidel Castro. Launched from Guatemala, the invading force was defeated within three days by the Cuban Revolutionary Armed Forces, under the direct command of Prime Minister Fidel Castro. US President Dwight D. Eisenhower was concerned at the direction Castro's government was taking, and in March 1960, Eisenhower allocated $13.1 million to the CIA to plan Castro's overthrow. The CIA proceeded to organize the operation with the aid of various Cuban counter-revolutionary forces, training Brigade 2506 in Guatemala. Over 1,400 paramilitaries set out for Cuba by boat on April 13. Two days later on April 15, eight CIA-supplied B-26 bombers attacked Cuban air fields. On the night of April 16, the main invasion landed in the Bay of Pigs, but by April 20, the invaders finally surrendered. The failed invasion strengthened the position of Castro's leadership as well as his ties with the USSR. This led eventually to the events of the Cuban Missile Crisis of 1962. The invasion was a major embarrassment for US foreign policy. US President John F. Kennedy ordered a number of internal investigations across Latin America. The Taylor Board was commissioned to determine what went wrong in Cuba. The Board came to the same conclusion that the Jan '61 President's Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities had concluded, and many other reviews prior, and to come, that Covert Action had to be completely isolated from intelligence and analysis. The Inspector General of the CIA investigated the Bay of Pigs. His conclusion was that there was a need to drastically improve the organization and management of the CIA. The Special Group (Later renamed the 303 committee) was convened in an oversight role. Cuban Missile Crisis Subsequent to the downing of the May Day U-2 reconnaissance plane, and a later downing in China, JFK ordered a 45 day cessation of U-2 flights, including flights over Cuba that had recently discovered the first Soviet high altitude Surface to Air Missile launcher site. There were fears of antagonism, and an election was around the corner. During this "photo gap" the CIA received a report from a source from Operation Mongoose, a road watcher describing covered tractor trailers moving that were shaped like large telephone poles. Control of U-2 flights was moved to the Air Force, and October 14 U-2 flights resumed. The Cuban Missile Crisis formally started the next day when American photo analysts identified R-12 1 Megaton MRBMs which could target parts of the east coast with its 2,000 km range. R-14s which could target most of the continental US, as well as 9M21 tactical nukes had also been deployed. Early Cold War, 1953–1966 Lockheed U-2 "Dragon Lady", the first generation of near-space reconnaissance aircraft Early CORONA/KH-4B imagery IMINT satellite The USAF's SR-71 Blackbird was developed from the CIA's A-12 OXCART. The CIA was involved in anti-Communist activities in Burma, Guatemala, and Laos.[92] There have been suggestions that the Soviet attempt to put missiles into Cuba came, indirectly, when they realized how badly they had been compromised by a U.S.-UK defector in place, Oleg Penkovsky.[93] One of the biggest operations ever undertaken by the CIA was directed at Zaïre in support of general-turned-dictator Mobutu Sese Seko.[94] Indochina, Tibet and the Vietnam War (1954–1975) See also: CIA Tibetan program, Vietnam War, Phoenix Program, and Operation Barrel Roll The OSS Patti mission arrived in Vietnam near the end of World War II, and had significant interaction with the leaders of many Vietnamese factions, including Ho Chi Minh.[95] While the Patti mission forwarded Ho's proposals for phased independence, with the French or even the United States as the transition partner, the US policy of containment opposed forming any government that was communist in nature. The first CIA mission to Indochina, under the code name Saigon Military Mission arrived in 1954, under Edward Lansdale. U.S.-based analysts were simultaneously trying to project the evolution of political power, both if the scheduled referendum chose merger of the North and South, or if the South, the U.S. client, stayed independent. Initially, the US focus in Southeast Asia was on Laos, not Vietnam. The CIA Tibetan program consists of political plots, propaganda distribution, as well as paramilitary and intelligence gathering based on U.S. commitments made to the Dalai Lama in 1951 and 1956.[96] During the period of U.S. combat involvement in the Vietnam War, there was considerable argument about progress among the Department of Defense under Robert McNamara, the CIA, and, to some extent, the intelligence staff of Military Assistance Command Vietnam.[97] In general, the military was consistently more optimistic than the CIA. Sam Adams, a junior CIA analyst with responsibilities for estimating the actual damage to the enemy, eventually resigned from the CIA, after expressing concern to Director of Central Intelligence Richard Helms with estimates that were changed for interagency and White House political reasons. Adams afterward wrote the book War of Numbers. Sometime between 1959 and 1961 the CIA started Project Tiger, a program of dropping South Vietnamese agents into North Vietnam to gather intelligence. These were a tragic failure; the Deputy Chief for Project Tiger, Captain Do Van Tien, admitted that he was an agent for Hanoi.[98] President Diem's brutal government violently repressed the Buddhist majority. On August 23, 1963, after being approached by a South Vietnamese General, Kennedy ordered the newly appointed South Vietnamese Ambassador to make detailed plans for Diem's replacement. DI McCone compared Diem to a bad pitcher, implying that he shouldn't be taken out of the game unless they had a better replacement. Kennedy's Cabinet was dubious about the coup, and JFK would come to regret it. Ambassador Henry Cabot Lodge, a longtime political opponent of JFK, was jealous that the CIA station had more money, power, and people than his staff. Lodge revealed the name of John Richardson, the CIA station chief, to a reporter, branding him an agent of the CIA, he later moved into Richardson's Saigon house, which was larger than the one Lodge had been in. The coup occurred on 1 November. Johnson The assassination of Diem sparked a cascade of coups in Saigon, and at the same time the city was wracked with assassinations. Johnson, the new President wanted to refocus the CIA on intelligence, rather than covert action, while the Kennedy's were seen as relentless in their hounding of the CIA to produce results, Johnson would soon give them only the most minimal attention. In the face of the failure of Project Tiger, the Pentagon wanted CIA paramilitary forces to participate in their Op Plan 64A, this resulted in the CIA's foreign paramilitaries being put under the command of the DOD, a move seen as a slippery slope inside the CIA, a slide from covert action towards militarization.[99] After touring vietnam in '64, DI McCone and sec def McNamara had different views of the US position. McCone believed that as long as the ho chi minh trail was active the US would struggle. DI McCone had statutory control over all intelligence committees, but in reality, but the military had near total control of the DIA, the NRO, the NSA, and many other aspects. Importantly, President Johnson almost completely ignored the CIA. In effect, the military controlled the 2/3rds of the CIA budget laid out for covert action. McCone, the unspoken hero of the cuban missile crisis, submitted his resignation in the summer, but Johnson would not accept it until after the election. On August 4, SecDef McNamara gave President Johnson the raw translation of intercepted korean transmissions directly from the NSA which, ostensibly, reported to DI McCone, rather than to McNamara. It would later be determined that the transmission took place before the weapon discharges that night which leads to the conclusion that the transmission refers to the events of the attack the day before, and that, although Destroyers Maddox, and Turner Joy fired hundreds of shells at intermittent radar contacts, they were firing at false returns. A CIA analyst's assessment of Vietnam was that the US was "becoming progressively divorced from reality... [and] proceeding with far more courage than wisdom".[100] The CIA had created an exhaustive report, "The Vietnamese Communist's Will to Persist". This created a key flashpoint in the U.S. government, PAVN troop levels,. Was it 500k or more as the CIA believed, or 300k or less as the commanders of US forces in Vietnam believed. The argument went on for months, but Helms finally OK'd a report saying that PAVN troop levels were 299,000 or less. The DOD argument was that whatever the facts on the ground, to publicly admit any higher number could be the last nail in the coffin of the war for vietnam in the press. Nixon In 1971, the NSA and CIA were engaged in domestic spying. The DOD was eavesdropping on Kissinger. The White House, and Camp David were wired for sound. Nixon and Kissinger were eavesdropping on their aides, as well as reporters. Famously, Nixon's Plumbers had in their number many former CIA agents, including Howard Hunt, Jim McCord, and Eugenio Martinez. On July 7, 1971, John Ehrlichman, Nixon's domestic policy chief, told DCI Cushman, Nixon's hatchet-man in the CIA, to let Cushman "know that [Hunt] was in fact doing some things for the President... you should consider he has pretty much carte blanche"[101] Importantly, this included a camera, disguises, a voice altering device, and ID papers furnished by the CIA, as well as the CIA's participation developing film from the burglary Hunt staged on the office of Pentagon Papers leaker Daniel Ellsberg's psychologist. On June 17, Nixon's Plumbers were caught burglarizing the DNC offices in the Watergate. On June 23, DI Helms was ordered by the White House to wave the FBI off using national security as a pretext. The new DCI, Walters, another Nixon hack, told the acting director of the FBI and told him to drop the investigation as ordered.[102] On June 26, Nixon's counsel John Dean ordered DCI Walters to pay the plumbers untraceable hush money. The CIA was the only part of the government that had the power to make off the book payments, but it could only be done on the orders of the CI, or, if he was out of the country, the DCI. The Acting Director of the FBI started breaking ranks. He demanded the CIA produce a signed document attesting to the national security threat of the investigation. Jim McCord's lawyer contacted the CIA informing them that McCord had been offered a Presidential pardon if he fingered the CIA, testifying that the break-in had been an operation of the CIA. Nixon had long been frustrated by what he saw as a liberal infection inside the CIA, and had been trying for years to tear the CIA out by its roots. McCord wrote "If [DI] Helms goes (takes the fall) and the Watergate operation is laid at the CIA's feet, where it does not belong, every tree in the forest will fall. It will be a scorched desert."[103] On November 13, after Nixon's landslide re-election, Nixon told Kissinger "[I intend] to ruin the Foreign Service. I mean ruin it - the old Foreign Service - and to build a new one." He had similar designs for the CIA, and intended to replace Helms with James Schlesinger.[103] Nixon had told Helms that he was on the way out, and promised that Helms could stay on until his 60th birthday, the mandatory retirement age. On February 2, Nixon broke that promise, carrying through with his intention to "remove the deadwood" from the CIA. "Get rid of the clowns" was his order to the incoming CI. Kissinger had been running the CIA since the beginning of Nixon's presidency, but Nixon impressed on Schlesinger that he must appear to congress to be in charge, averting their suspicion of Kissinger's involvement.[104] Nixon also hoped that Schlesinger could push through broader changes in the intelligence community that he had been working towards for years, the creation of a Director of National Intelligence, and spinning off the covert action part of the CIA into a separate organ. Before Helms would leave office, he would destroy every tape he had secretly made of meetings in his office, and many of the papers on Project MKUltra. In Schlesinger's 17 week tenure, he would fire more than 1,500 employees. As Watergate threw the spotlight on the CIA, Schlesinger, who had been kept in the dark about the CIA's involvement, decided he needed to know what skeletons were in the closet. He issued a memo to every CIA employee directing them to disclose to him any CIA activity they knew of past or present that could fall outside the scope of the CIA's charter. This became the Family Jewels. It included information linking the CIA to the assassination of foreign leaders, the illegal surveillance of some 7,000 U.S. citizens involved in the antiwar movement (Operation CHAOS), the CIA had also experimented on U.S. and Canadian citizens without their knowledge, secretly giving them LSD (among other things) and observing the results.[105] This prompted Congress to create the Church Committee in the Senate, and the Pike Committee in the House. President Gerald Ford created the Rockefeller Commission,[105] and issued an executive order prohibiting the assassination of foreign leaders. DCI Colby leaked the papers to the press, later he stated that he believed that providing Congress with this information was the correct thing to do, and ultimately in the CIA's own interests.[106] Congressional Investigations Acting Attorney General Laurence Silberman learned of the existence of the family jewels, he issued a subpoena for them, prompting eight congressional investigations on the domestic spying activities of the CIA. Bill Colby's short tenure as DCI would end with the Halloween Massacre. His replacement was George H.W. Bush. At the time, the DOD had control of 80% of the intelligence budget.[107] Communication and coordination between the CIA and the DOD would suffer greatly under Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld. The CIA's budget for hiring clandestine officers had been squeezed out by the paramilitary operations in south-east Asia, and hiring was further strained by the government's poor popularity. This left the Agency bloated with middle management, and anemic in younger officers. With employee training taking five years, the Agency's only hope would be on the trickle of new officers coming to fruition years in the future. The CIA would see another setback as communists would take Angola. William J. Casey, a member of Ford's Intelligence Advisory Board, would press Bush to allow a team from outside the CIA to produce Soviet military estimates as a "Team B". Bush gave the OK. The "B" team was composed of hawks. Their estimates were the highest that could be justified, and they painted a picture of a growing Soviet military when the Soviet military was actually shrinking. Many of their reports found their way to the press. As a result of the investigations, Congressional oversight of the CIA eventually evolved into a select intelligence committee in the House, and Senate supervising covert actions authorized by the President. Counter-Espionage Against the USSR In 1981, French President Mitterrand told Reagan to look at the product from Vladimir Vetrov, the Farewell Dossier. This detailed information from Line X of the KGB's Science and Technology Directorate. This detailed the Russian's technological espionage efforts, including the agents involved. The CIA started feeding the KGB flawed designs for chips, Space Shuttles, and software. One of the highest profile successes was the explosion of the Siberian oil pipeline. Chad − Chad's neighbor Libya was a major source of weaponry to communist rebel forces. The CIA seized the opportunity to arm and finance Chad's Prime Minister, Hissène Habré after he created a breakaway government in Western Sudan,[108] even giving him Stinger missiles.[109] Afghanistan See also: CIA activities in Afghanistan and Operation Cyclone Further information: Allegations of CIA assistance to Osama bin Laden In Afghanistan, the CIA funneled $40 billion worth of weapons,[110] which included over two thousand FIM-92 Stinger surface-to-air missiles,[111] to Pakistani Inter-Services Intelligence (ISI), which funneled them to almost 100,000 Afghan resistance fighters, notably the Mujahideen, and foreign "Afghan Arabs" from forty Muslim countries.[112][113] Iran Contra Under President Carter, the CIA was conducting covertly funding pro-American opposition against the Sandinista. In March, 1981, Reagan told Congress that the CIA would protect El Salvador by preventing the shipment of Nicaraguan arms into the country to arm Communist rebels. This was a ruse. The CIA was actually arming and training Nicaraguans Contras in Honduras in hopes that they could depose the Sandinistas in Nicaragua.[114] Through William J. Casey's tenure as DI little of what he said in the National Security Planning Group, or to President Reagan was supported by the intelligence branch of the CIA, so Casey formed the Central American Task Force, staffed with yes men from Covert Action.[114] On December 21, 1982, Congress passed a law restricting the CIA to its stated mission, restricting the flow of arms from Nicaragua to El Salvador, prohibiting the use of funds to oust the Sandinistas. Reagan testified before Congress, assuring them that the CIA was not trying to topple the Nicaraguan government. During this time, with funding increases, the CIA would hire 2,000 new employees, but these new recruits lacked the experience of the WW2 vets they replaced, living in the theaters where the war was fought, Europe, Africa, the Middle East, and Asia. During Casey's tenure, CIA management would become experts at lying to, and deceiving Congress, and even to one another. Hostage taking For more than a decade, hostage taking had plagued the middle east. The CIA's best source of information there was Hassan Salameh The PLO's Chief of Intelligence, until Israel assassinated him. Through Salameh, the CIA gained a foothold in the world of Muslim extremism, and had entered a bargain where Americans would be safe, and the PLO and CIA would share information on mutual enemies. Lebanon The CIA's prime source in Lebanon was Bashir Gemayel, a member of the Christian Maronite sect. The CIA was blinded by the uprising against the Maronite minority. Israel invaded Lebanon, and, along with the CIA, propped up Gemayel. This got Gemayel's assurance that Americans would be protected in Lebanon. 13 days later he was assassinated. Imad Mughniyah, a Hezbollah assassin would target Americans in retaliation for the Israeli invasion, the Sabra and Shatila massacre, and the US Marines of the Multi-National Force for their role in opposing the PLO in Lebanon. On April 18, 1983 a 2,000 lb car bomb exploded in the lobby of the American embassy in Beirut, killing 63 people including 17 Americans, and 7 CIA officers, including Robert Ames, one of the CIA's best Middle East experts. America's fortunes in Lebanon would only suffer more as America's poorly-directed retaliation for the bombing was interpreted by many as support for the Christian Maronite minority. On October 23, 1983, two bombs were Beirut in Beirut, including a 10 ton bomb at a US military barracks that killed 242 people. Both attacks are believed to have been planned by Iran by way of Mughniyah. The Embassy bombing had taken the life of the CIA's Beirut Station Chief, Ken Haas. Bill Buckley was sent in to replace him. Eighteen days after the US Marines left Lebanon, Buckley was kidnapped. On March 7, 1984, Jeremy Levin, CNN Bureau Chief in Beirut was kidnapped. Twelve more Americans would be kidnapped in Beirut during the Reagan Administration. Manucher Ghorbanifar, a former Savak agent was an information seller, and the subject of a rare CIA burn notice for his track record of misinformation. He reached out to the Agency offering a back channel to Iran, suggesting a trade of missiles that would be lucrative to the intermediaries.[115] Nicaragua With the CIA's paramilitary forces overextended in Central America, they turned to former Special Forces soldiers, one of whom had an old comic book that had, in Vietnam, been used to teach natives how to take control of a village by assassinating the Mayor, Chief of Police, and Militia. The CIA translated this into Spanish, and distributed it to the Contras. This shortly became public. The CIA also mined the port of Corinto, an act of war that resulted in a public trial in the International Court of Justice. These two public incidents triggered Congress to clamp down on CIA funding even more, banning them from soliciting funds from third parties to fund the Contras. Hostage trades At Reagan's second inaugural, the two most pressing issues for the CIA were the Contras and the hostages. On June 14, 1985 Hezbollah took TWA Flight 847, and executed an American Navy diver on the tarmac of Beirut airport. Reagan negotiated a trade of prisoners for hostages. This paved the way for a trade of 504 TOW Missiles to Iran for $10,000 each, and the release of Benjamin Weir, a captive of Islamic Jihad, the group that claimed responsibility for the Beirut bombings which would later become Hezbollah. This broke two of the public pillars of Reagan's foreign policy, no deals with terrorists, and no arms to Iran. Ghorbanifar sent word that the 6 remaining hostages in exchange for thousands of Hawk missiles. A Boeing 707 with 18 Hawk missiles landed at Tehran from Tel Aviv with Hebrew markings on the crates. The CIA realized on that day, October 25 that they needed a signed presidential order to authorize the shipment. A month later Reagan would sign an order retroactively authorizing it. $850,000 of the transaction went to Contras. In July 1986, Hezbollah was holding 4 American hostages, trading them for arms. Six months later, they had 12 American hostages. On October 5, 1986, an American C-123 full of weapons was shot down by a Nicaraguan soldier. The sole survivor was an American cargo handler who said that he was working for the CIA. On November 3, anonymous leaflets were scattered in Tehran revealing the Iran connection. The Iran Contra Affair broke. Oliver North and John Poindexter had been shredding documents for weeks, but a memo about suspicions that Secord was taking more than his agreed cut surfaced. DI Bill Casey had a seizure and was hospitalized, to be replaced by Judge Webster, clearly brought in to clean house. Poland 1980–89 See also: Poland–United States relations Unlike the Carter Administration, the Reagan Administration supported the Solidarity movement in Poland, and—based on CIA intelligence—waged a public relations campaign to deter what the Carter administration felt was "an imminent move by large Soviet military forces into Poland." Colonel Ryszard Kukliński, a senior officer on the Polish General Staff was secretly sending reports to the CIA.[116] The CIA transferred around $2 million yearly in cash to Solidarity, which suggests that $10 million total is a reasonable estimate for the 5-year total. There were no direct links between the CIA and Solidarnosc, and all money was channeled through third parties.[117] CIA officers were barred from meeting Solidarity leaders, and the CIA's contacts with Solidarnosc activists were weaker than those of the AFL-CIO, which raised 300 thousand dollars from its members, which were used to provide material and cash directly to Soldarity, with no control of Solidarity's use of it. The U.S. Congress authorized the National Endowment for Democracy to promote democracy, and the NED allocated $10 million to Solidarity.[118] When the Polish government launched a crackdown of its own in December 1981, however, Solidarity was not alerted. Potential explanations for this vary; some believe that the CIA was caught off guard, while others suggest that American policy-makers viewed an internal crackdown as preferable to an "inevitable Soviet intervention."[119] CIA support for Solidarity included money, equipment and training,which was coordinated by Special Operations CIA division[120]Henry Hyde, U.S. House intelligence committee member, stated that USA provided "supplies and technical assistance in terms of clandestine newspapers, broadcasting, propaganda, money, organizational help and advice".[121] Michael Reisman from Yale Law School named operations in Poland as one of the covert actions of CIA during Cold War [122] Initial funds for covert actions by CIA were $2 million, but soon after authorization were increased and by 1985 CIA successfully infiltrated Poland[123] Rainer Thiel in "Nested Games of External Democracy Promotion: The United States and the Polish Liberalization 1980-1989" mentions how covert operations by CIA and spy games among others allowed USA to proceed with successful regime change.[124] Operation Desert Storm Main article: Gulf War During the Iran-Iraq war, the CIA had backed both sides. The CIA had maintained a network of spies in Iran, but in 1989 a CIA mistake compromised every agent they had in there, and the CIA had no agents in Iraq. In the weeks before the Invasion of Kuwait the CIA downplayed the military buildup. During the war CIA estimates of Iraqi abilities and intentions flip-flopped and were rarely accurate. In one particular case, the DOD had asked the CIA to identify military targets to bomb. One target the CIA identified was an underground shelter. The CIA didn't know that it was a civilian bomb shelter. In a rare instance the CIA correctly determined that the coalition forces efforts were coming up short in their efforts to destroy SCUD missiles. Congress took away the CIA's role in interpreting spy-satellite photos, putting the CIA's satellite intelligence operations under the auspices of the military. The CIA created its office of military affairs, which operated as "second-echelon support for the pentagon... answering... questions from military men [like] 'how wide is this road?'"[125] At the end of the war, the CIA reported that there could be an uprising against Saddam, based on intelligence gained from exiles. Former DI, and current President Bush called on the Shiites and Kurds to rise up against Saddam, while, at the same time, withdrawing any support against Saddam. Saddam crushed the uprisings brutally. After the war, Saddam's nuclear program was discovered. The CIA had had no information about it. Fall of the USSR Gorbachev's announcement of the unilateral reduction of 500,000 Soviet troops took the CIA by surprise. What's more, Doug MacEachin, the CIA's Chief of Soviet analysis said that even if the CIA had told the President, the NSC, and Congress about the cuts beforehand, it would have been ignored. "We never would have been able to publish it."[126] All the CIA numbers on the USSR's economy were wrong. Too often the CIA relied on people inexperienced with that which they were supposed to be the expert. Bob Gates had preceded Doug MacEachin as Chief of Soviet analysis, and he had never visited Russia. Few officers, even those stationed in country spoke the language of the people they were spying on. And the CIA had no capacity to send agents to respond to developing situations. The CIA analysis of Russia during the entire cold war was either driven by ideology, or by politics. William J Crowe, the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff noted that the CIA "talked about the Soviet Union as if they weren't reading the newspapers, much less developed clandestine intelligence."[127] The CIA was even caught unprepared when the Berlin Wall fell. In the History of the Cold War, the CIA had only had 3 notable soviet spies, they had handed themselves to the CIA. Each one had been caught and executed.[citation needed] One of the first acts of Bob Gates, the new DI, was National Security Review 29, a memo to each member of the Cabinet asking them what they wanted from the CIA. Starting in 1991 the CIA would see 6 years of budget cuts. Perhaps blind to the past, the CIA would close 20 stations, and cut its staff in some major capitals by 60%. The CIA could still not shake the perennial analysis, that it was 5 years away from being able to perform its basic duties satisfactorily. President Clinton On January 25, 1993, Mir Qazi opened fire at the CIA headquarters in Langley, Virginia, killing two agents and wounding three others. On February 26, Al-Qaeda terrorists led by Ramzi Yousef bombed the parking garage below the North Tower of the World Trade Center in New York City, killing six people and injured 1,402 others. During the Bosnian War, the CIA ignored signs within and without of the Srebrenica massacre. Two weeks after news reports of the slaughter, the CIA sent a U-2 to photograph it, a week later the CIA completed its report on the matter. During Operation Allied Force, the CIA had incorrectly provided the coordinates of the Chinese Embassy as a Yugoslav military target resulting in its bombing. In France, the CIA had orders for economic intelligence, a female CIA agent revealed her connections to the CIA to the French. Dick Holm, Paris Station Chief, was expelled. In Guatemala, the CIA produced the Murphy Memo, based on audio recordings made by bugs planted in the bedroom of Ambassador Marilyn McAfee placed by Guatemalan intelligence. In the recording, Ambassador McAfee verbally entreated "Murphy". The CIA circulated a memo in the highest Washington circles accusing Ambassador McAfee of having an extramarital lesbian affair with her secretary, Carol Murphy. There was no affair. Ambassador McAfee was calling to Murphy, her poodle.[128] The CIA was still bucking the reigns of Congress, Presidents, and DCIs that had ordered that ties of the CIA to harsh regimes that had stood for decades be broken. In Iraq, under Clinton's orders, the CIA was trying to form a coup. The plot was compromised, Saddam arrested over 200 of his own officers, executing over 80. Again this would be a case where the NSC wanted CI to give them answers they didn't have, and to make decisions for the NSC that neither the NSC, nor CI could make. Clinton wanted a coup in Iraq, and wanted him to be replaced by someone aligned with the US, but if that US friendly officer existed, neither the CIA nor NSC knew him. Harold James Nicholson would burn several serving officers and 3 years of trainees before he was caught spying for Russia. In 1997 the House would pen another report, which said that CIA officers know little about the language or politics of the people they spy on, the conclusion was that the CIA lacked the "depth, breadth, and expertise to monitor political, military, and economic developments worldwide."[129] There was a new voice in the CIA to counterpoint the endless chant that the CIA was 5 years away from success. Russ Travers said in the CIA in-house journal that in 5 years "intelligence failure is inevitable".[130] In 1997 the CIA's new director George Tenet would promise a new working agency by 2002. The CIA's surprise at India's detonation of an atom bomb was a failure at almost every level. After the 1998 embassy bombings by Al Qaeda, the CIA offered two targets to be hit in retaliation. One of them was a chemical plant where traces of chemical weapon precursors had been detected. In the aftermath it was concluded that "the decision to target al Shifa continues a tradition of operating on inadequate intelligence about Sudan." It triggered the CIA to make "substantial and sweeping changes" to prevent "a catasrophic systemic intelligence failure."[131] Between 1991 and 1998 the CIA had lost 3,000 employees. Somalia Half a million people had starved in Somalia when President George H. W. Bush ordered U.S. troops to enter the country on a humanitarian mission. As clans started fighting over the aid, the humanitarian mission quickly became a struggle against Mohamed Farah Aideed. The CIA station in Somalia had been shuttered for two years. The CIA was given an impossible mission in Somalia, as was the Military. Casualties came quickly and were high in the 8 man team the CIA sent. A post mortem carried out by now FISA member Admiral Crowe stated that the National Security Council had expected the CIA to both make decisions, and give them the intelligence to base those decisions on. The NSC couldn't understand why intelligence didn't advise them correctly on what to do. Clinton would enter the ranks of Presidents unhappy with the results of the CIA, Clinton's inattention to the CIA did not help the matter. Aldrich Ames See also: Aldrich Ames Between 1985 and 1986 the CIA lost every spy it had in Eastern Europe. The details of the investigation into the cause was obscured from the new Director, and the investigation had little success, and has been widely criticized. In June 1987, Major Florentino Aspillaga Lombard, the chief of Cuban Intelligence in Czechoslovakia drove into Vienna, and walked into the American Embassy to defect. He revealed that every single Cuban spy on the CIA payroll was a double agent, pretending to work for the CIA, but secretly still being loyal to Castro. On February 21, 1994, FBI agents pulled Aldrich Ames out of his Jaguar.[132] In the investigation that ensued, the CIA discovered that many of the sources for its most important analyses of the USSR were based on soviet disinformation fed to the CIA by controlled agents. On top of that, it was discovered that, in some cases, the CIA suspected at the time that the sources were compromised, but the information was sent up the chain as genuine.[133][134] This prompted a congressional committee in 1994 to address what was widely seen as a fundamentally broken institution. The committee quickly became a quagmire. When the committee submitted its report, the CIA had 25 recruits entering its 2 year training program, the smallest class of recruits ever.[citation needed] Osama Bin Laden Agency files show that it is believed Osama Bin Laden was funding the Afghan rebels against the USSR in the 1980s.[135] In 1991, Bin Laden returned to his native Saudi Arabia protesting the presence of troops, and Operation Desert Storm. He was expelled from the country. In 1996 the CIA created a team to hunt Bin Laden. They were trading information with the Sudanese until, on the word of a source that would later be found to be a fabricator, the CIA closed its Sudan station later that year. In 1998 Bin Laden would declare war on America, and, on August 7, strike in Tanzania and Nairobi. On October 12, 2000, Al Qaeda bombed the USS Cole. In 1947 when the CIA was founded, there were 200 agents in the Clandestine Service. In 2001, of the 17,000 employees in the CIA, there were 1,000 in the Clandestine Service. Of that 1,000 few would accept hardship postings. In the first days of George W. Bush' Presidency, Al Qaeda threats were ubiquitous in daily Presidential CIA briefings, but it may have become a case of the boy who cries wolf. The Agency's predictions were dire, but carried little weight, and the attentions of the President, and his defense staff were elsewhere. The CIA arranged the arrests of suspected Al Qaeda members through cooperation with foreign agencies, but the CIA could not definitively say what effect these arrests had hat, and it could not gain hard intelligence from those captured. The President had asked the CIA if Al Qaeda could plan attacks in the US. On August 6, Bush received a daily briefing with the headline, not based on current, solid intelligence, "Al Qaeda determined to strike inside the US." The US had been hunting Bin Laden since '96 and had had several opportunities, but neither Clinton, nor Bush had wanted to risk their skin taking an active role in a murky assassination plot, and the perfect opportunity had never materialized for a trigger shy DI that would have given him the reassurances he needed to take the plunge. That day, Richard A. Clarke sent National Security Advisor Condoleezza Rice warning of the risks, and decrying the inaction of the CIA.[136] Al-Qaeda and the "Global War on Terrorism" Further information: CIA transnational anti-terrorism activities, CIA transnational human rights actions and Senate Intelligence Committee report on CIA torture The CIA prepared a series of leaflets announcing bounties for those who turned in or denounced individual suspected of association with the Taliban or al Qaeda. The CIA had long been dealing with terrorism originating from abroad, and in 1986 had set up a Counterterrorist Center to deal specifically with the problem. At first confronted with secular terrorism, the Agency found Islamist terrorism looming increasingly large on its scope. In January 1996, the CIA created an experimental "virtual station," the Bin Laden Issue Station, under the Counterterrorist Center, to track Bin Laden's developing activities. Al-Fadl, who defected to the CIA in spring 1996, began to provide the Station with a new image of the Al Qaeda leader: he was not only a terrorist financier, but a terrorist organizer, too. FBI Special Agent Dan Coleman (who together with his partner Jack Cloonan had been "seconded" to the Bin Laden Station) called him Qaeda's "Rosetta Stone".[137] In 1999, CIA chief George Tenet launched a grand "Plan" to deal with al-Qaeda. The Counterterrorist Center, its new chief Cofer Black and the center's Bin Laden unit were the Plan's developers and executors. Once it was prepared Tenet assigned CIA intelligence chief Charles E. Allen to set up a "Qaeda cell" to oversee its tactical execution.[138] In 2000, the CIA and USAF jointly ran a series of flights over Afghanistan with a small remote-controlled reconnaissance drone, the Predator; they obtained probable photos of Bin Laden. Cofer Black and others became advocates of arming the Predator with missiles to try to assassinate Bin Laden and other al-Qaeda leaders. After the Cabinet-level Principals Committee meeting on terrorism of September 4, 2001, the CIA resumed reconnaissance flights, the drones now being weapons-capable. September 11 attacks and its aftermath US Special Forces help Northern Alliance troops away from a CIA-operated MI-17 Hip helicopter at Bagram Airbase, 2002 On September 11, 2001, 19 Al-Qaeda members hijacked four passenger jets within the Northeastern United States in a series of coordinated terrorist attacks. Two planes crashed into the Twin Towers of the World Trade Center in New York City, the third into the Pentagon in Arlington County, Virginia, and the fourth inadvertently into a field near Shanksville, Pennsylvania. The attacks cost the lives of 2,996 people (including the 19 hijackers), caused the destruction of the Twin Towers, and damaged the western side of the Pentagon. Soon after 9/11, the New York Times released a story stating that the CIA's New York field office was destroyed in the wake of the attacks. According to unnamed CIA sources, while first responders, military personnel and volunteers were conducting rescue efforts at the World Trade Center site, a special CIA team was searching the rubble for both digital and paper copies of classified documents. This was done according to well-rehearsed document recovery procedures put in place after the Iranian takeover of the United States Embassy in Tehran in 1979. While it was not confirmed whether the agency was able to retrieve the classified information, it is known that all agents present that day fled the building safely. While the CIA insists that those who conducted the attacks on 9/11 were not aware that the agency was operating at 7 World Trade Center under the guise of another (unidentified) federal agency, this center was the headquarters for many notable criminal terrorism investigations. Though the New York field offices' main responsibilities were to monitor and recruit foreign officials stationed at the United Nations, the field office also handled the investigations of the August 1998 bombings of United States Embassies in East Africa and the October 2000 bombing of the USS Cole.[139] Despite the fact that the CIA's New York branch may have been damaged by the 9/11 attacks and they had to loan office space from the US Mission to the United Nations and other federal agencies, there was an upside for the CIA.[139] In the months immediately following 9/11, there was a huge increase in the amount of applications for CIA positions. According to CIA representatives that spoke with the New York Times, pre-9/11 the agency received approximately 500 to 600 applications a week, in the months following 9/11 the agency received that number daily.[140] The intelligence community as a whole, and especially the CIA, were involved in presidential planning immediately after the 9/11 attacks. In his address to the nation at 8:30pm on September 11, 2001 George W. Bush mentioned the intelligence community: "The search is underway for those who are behind these evil acts, I've directed the full resource of our intelligence and law enforcement communities to find those responsible and bring them to justice."[141] The involvement of the CIA in the newly coined "War on Terror" was further increased on September 15, 2001. During a meeting at Camp David George W. Bush agreed to adopt a plan proposed by CIA director George Tenet. This plan consisted of conducting a covert war in which CIA paramilitary officers would cooperate with anti-Taliban guerillas inside Afghanistan. They would later be joined by small special operations forces teams which would call in precision airstrikes on Taliban and Al Qaeda fighters. This plan was codified on September 16, 2001 with Bush's signature of an official Memorandum of Notification that allowed the plan to proceed.[142] Former CIA director Robert Gates meets with Russian Minister of Defense and ex-KGB officer Sergei Ivanov, 2007 On November 25–27, 2001 Taliban prisoners revolt at the Qala Jangi prison west of Mazar-e-Sharif. Though several days of struggle occurred between the Taliban prisoners and the Northern Alliance members present, the prisoners did gain the upperhand and obtain North Alliance weapons. At some point during this period Johnny "Mike" Spann, a CIA officer sent to question the prisoners, was beaten to death. He became the first American to die in combat in the war in Afghanistan.[142] After 9/11, the CIA came under criticism for not having done enough to prevent the attacks. Tenet rejected the criticism, citing the Agency's planning efforts especially over the preceding two years. He also considered that the CIA's efforts had put the Agency in a position to respond rapidly and effectively to the attacks, both in the "Afghan sanctuary" and in "ninety-two countries around the world".[143] The new strategy was called the "Worldwide Attack Matrix". Anwar al-Awlaki, a Yemeni-American U.S. citizen and al-Qaeda member, was killed on September 30, 2011, by an air attack carried out by the Joint Special Operations Command. After several days of surveillance of Awlaki by the Central Intelligence Agency, armed drones took off from a new, secret American base in the Arabian Peninsula, crossed into northern Yemen, and fired a number of Hellfire missiles at al-Awlaki's vehicle. Samir Khan, a Pakistani-American al-Qaeda member and editor of the jihadist Inspire magazine, also reportedly died in the attack. The combined CIA/JSOC drone strike was the first in Yemen since 2002 – there have been others by the military's Special Operations forces – and was part of an effort by the spy agency to duplicate in Yemen the covert war which has been running in Afghanistan and Pakistan.[144][145] Use of vaccination programs The agency attracted widespread criticism after it used a doctor in Pakistan to set up a vaccination program in Abbottabad in 2011 to obtain DNA samples from the occupants of a compound where it was suspected bin Laden was living.[146] Subsequently in May 2014 a counterterrorism advisor to President Obama wrote to deans of 13 prominent public health schools giving an undertaking the CIA would not engage in vaccination programs or engage U.S. or non-U.S. health workers in immunization arrangements for espionage purposes.[citation needed] Failures in intelligence analysis A major criticism is failure to forestall the September 11 attacks. The 9/11 Commission Report identifies failures in the IC as a whole. One problem, for example, was the FBI failing to "connect the dots" by sharing information among its decentralized field offices. The report concluded that former DCI George Tenet failed to adequately prepare the agency to deal with the danger posed by al-Qaeda prior to the attacks of September 11, 2001.[147] The report was finished in June 2005 and was partially released to the public in an agreement with Congress, over the objections of current DCI General Michael Hayden. Hayden said its publication would "consume time and attention revisiting ground that is already well plowed."[148] Tenet disagreed with the report's conclusions, citing his planning efforts vis-à-vis al-Qaeda, particularly from 1999.[149] Abuses of CIA authority, 1970s–1990s Conditions worsened in the mid-1970s, around the time of Watergate. A dominant feature of political life during that period were the attempts of Congress to assert oversight of the U.S. Presidency and the executive branch of the U.S. government. Revelations about past CIA activities, such as assassinations and attempted assassinations of foreign leaders (most notably Fidel Castro and Rafael Trujillo) and illegal domestic spying on U.S. citizens, provided the opportunities to increase Congressional oversight of U.S. intelligence operations.[105] Hastening the CIA's fall from grace were the burglary of the Watergate headquarters of the Democratic Party by former CIA officers, and President Richard Nixon's subsequent attempt to use the CIA to impede the FBI's investigation of the burglary. In the famous "smoking gun" recording that led to President Nixon's resignation, Nixon ordered his chief of staff, H. R. Haldeman, to tell the CIA that further investigation of Watergate would "open the whole can of worms" about the Bay of Pigs Invasion of Cuba.[150] In this way Nixon and Haldemann ensured that the CIA's No. 1 and No. 2 ranking officials, Richard Helms and Vernon Walters, communicated to FBI Director L. Patrick Gray that the FBI should not follow the money trail from the burglars to the Committee to Re-elect the President, as it would uncover CIA informants in Mexico. The FBI initially agreed to this due to a long-standing agreement between the FBI and CIA not to uncover each other's sources of information, though within a couple of weeks the FBI demanded this request in writing, and when no such formal request came, the FBI resumed its investigation into the money trail. Nonetheless, when the smoking gun tapes were made public, damage to the public's perception of CIA's top officials, and thus to the CIA as a whole, could not be avoided.[151] President Gerald Ford meets with CIA Director-designate George H. W. Bush, December 17, 1975 Repercussions from the Iran-Contra affair arms smuggling scandal included the creation of the Intelligence Authorization Act in 1991. It defined covert operations as secret missions in geopolitical areas where the U.S. is neither openly nor apparently engaged. This also required an authorizing chain of command, including an official, presidential finding report and the informing of the House and Senate Intelligence Committees, which, in emergencies, requires only "timely notification." Iraq War Main article: CIA activities in Iraq Further information: Plame affair and CIA activities in the Near East, North Africa, South and Southwest Asia 72 days after the 9/11 attacks President Bush told his Secretary of Defense to update the US plan for an invasion of Iraq, but not to tell anyone. SecDef Rumsfeld asked Bush if he could bring DCI Tenet into the loop, to which Bush agreed.[152] Feelers the CIA had put out to Iraq in the form of 8 of their best officers in Kurdish territory in Northern Iraq hit a goldmine, unprecedented in the famously closed, almost fascist Hussein government. By December 2002 the CIA had close to a dozen good networks in Iraq[152]:242 and would advance so far that they would penetrate Iraq's SSO, and even tap the encrypted communications of the Deputy Prime Minister, even the bodyguard of Hussein's son became an agent. As time passed, the CIA would become more and more frantic about the possibility of their networks being compromised, "rolled up". To the CIA, the Invasion had to occur before the end of February 2003 if their sources inside Hussein's government were to survive. The rollup would happen as predicted, 37 CIA sources recognized by their Thuraya satellite telephones provided for them by the CIA.[152]:337 The case Colin Powell presented before the United Nations (purportedly proving an Iraqi WMD program) was wishful thinking. DDCI John E. McLaughlin was part of a long discussion in the CIA about equivocation. McLaughlin, who would make, among others, the "slam dunk" presentation to the President, "felt that they had to dare to be wrong to be clearer in their judgements".[152]:197 The Al Qaeda connection, for instance, was from a single source, extracted through torture, and was later denied. Curveball was a known liar, and the sole source for the mobile chemical weapons factories.[153] A postmortem of the intelligence failures in the lead up to Iraq led by former DDCI Richard Kerr would conclude that the CIA had been a casualty of the cold war, wiped out in a way "analogous to the effect of the meteor strikes on the dinosaurs."[154] The opening days of the Invasion of Iraq would see successes and defeats for the CIA. With its Iraq networks compromised, and its strategic, and tactical information shallow, and often wrong, the intelligence side of the invasion itself would be a black eye for the Agency. The CIA would see some success with its "Scorpion" paramilitary teams composed of CIA Special Activities Division agents, along with friendly Iraqi partisans. CIA SAD officers would also help the US 10th Special Forces.[152][155][156] The occupation of Iraq would be a low point in the history of the CIA. At the largest CIA station in the world agents would rotate through 1-3 month tours. In Iraq almost 500 transient agents would be trapped inside the Green Zone while Iraq Station Chiefs would rotate with only a little less frequency.[157] 2004, DNI takes over CIA top-level functions The Intelligence Reform and Terrorism Prevention Act of 2004 created the office of the Director of National Intelligence (DNI), who took over some of the government and intelligence community (IC)-wide functions that had previously been the CIA's. The DNI manages the United States Intelligence Community and in so doing it manages the intelligence cycle. Among the functions that moved to the DNI were the preparation of estimates reflecting the consolidated opinion of the 16 IC agencies, and preparation of briefings for the president. On July 30, 2008, President Bush issued Executive Order 13470[158] amending Executive Order 12333 to strengthen the role of the DNI.[159] Previously, the Director of Central Intelligence (DCI) oversaw the Intelligence Community, serving as the president's principal intelligence advisor, additionally serving as head of the CIA. The DCI's title now is "Director of the Central Intelligence Agency" (D/CIA), serving as head of the CIA. Currently, the CIA reports to the Director of National Intelligence. Prior to the establishment of the DNI, the CIA reported to the President, with informational briefings to congressional committees. The National Security Advisor is a permanent member of the National Security Council, responsible for briefing the President with pertinent information collected by all U.S. intelligence agencies, including the National Security Agency, the Drug Enforcement Administration, etc. All 16 Intelligence Community agencies are under the authority of the Director of National Intelligence. Operation Neptune Spear See also: Death of Osama bin Laden On May 1, 2011, President Barack Obama announced that Osama bin Laden was killed earlier that day by "a small team of Americans" operating in Abbottabad, Pakistan, during a CIA operation.[160][161] The raid was executed from a CIA forward base in Afghanistan by elements of the U.S. Navy's Naval Special Warfare Development Group and CIA paramilitary operatives.[162] It resulted in the acquisition of extensive intelligence on the future attack plans of al-Qaeda.[163][164][165] The operation was a result of years of intelligence work that included the CIA's capture and interrogation of Khalid Sheik Mohammad (KSM), which led to the identity of a courier of Bin Laden's,[166][167][168] the tracking of the courier to the compound by Special Activities Division paramilitary operatives and the establishing of a CIA safe house to provide critical tactical intelligence for the operation.[169][170][171] Syrian Civil War CIA operatives and U.S. special operations troops have trained and armed nearly 10,000 rebel fighters at a cost of $1 billion a year.[172] The CIA has been sending weapons to anti-government rebels in Syria since at least 2012.[173] These weapons have been reportedly falling into hands of extremists, such as al-Nusra Front and ISIL.[174][175] Reorganization On 6 March 2015, the office of the D/CIA issued an unclassified edition a statement by the Director, titled 'Our Agency's Blueprint for the Future', as a press release for public consumption. The press release announced sweeping plans for the reorganization and reform of the CIA, which the Director believes will bring the CIA more in line with the Agency doctrine called the 'Strategic Direction'. Among the principal changes disclosed include the establishment of a new directorate, the Directorate of Digital Innovation, which is responsible for designing and crafting the digital technology to be used by the Agency, to keep the CIA always ahead of its enemies. The Directorate of Digital Innovation will also train CIA staff in the use of this technology, to prepare the CIA for the future, and it will also use the technological revolution to deal with cyber-terrorism and other perceived threats. The new directorate will be the chief cyber-espionage arm of the Agency going forward.[176] Other changes which were announced include the formation of a Talent Development Center of Excellence, the enhancement and expansion of the CIA University and the creation of the office of the Chancellor to head the CIA University in order to consolidate and unify recruitment and training efforts. The office of the Executive Director will be empowered and expanded and the secretarial offices serving the Executive Director will be streamlined. The restructuring of the entire Agency is to be revamped according to a new model whereby governance is modelled after the structure and hierarchy of corporations, said to increase the efficiency of workflow and to greatly enable the Executive Director to manage day-to-day activity. As well, another stated intention was to establish 'Mission Centers', each one to deal with a specific geographic region of the world, which will bring the full collaboration and joint efforts of the five Directorates together under one roof. While the Directorate heads will still retain ultimate authority over their respective Directorate, the Missions Centers will be led by an Assistant Director who will work with the capabilities and talents of all five Directorates on mission specific goals for the parts of the world which they are given responsibility for.[176] The unclassified version of the document ends with the announcement that the National Clandestine Service (NCS) will be reverting to its original Directorate name, the Directorate of Operations. The Directorate of Intelligence is also being renamed, it will now be the Directorate of Analysis. [176] Open Source Intelligence Further information: Foreign Broadcast Information Service and Open Source Center Until the 2004 reorganization of the intelligence community, one of the "services of common concern" that the CIA provided was Open Source Intelligence from the Foreign Broadcast Information Service (FBIS).[177] FBIS, which had absorbed the Joint Publication Research Service, a military organization that translated documents,[178] moved into the National Open Source Enterprise under the Director of National Intelligence. During the Reagan administration, Michael Sekora (assigned to the DIA), worked with agencies across the intelligence community, including the CIA, to develop and deploy a technology-based competitive strategy system called Project Socrates. Project Socrates was designed to utilize open source intelligence gathering almost exclusively. The technology-focused Socrates system supported such programs as the Strategic Defense Initiative in addition to private sector projects.[179][180] As part of its mandate to gather intelligence, the CIA is looking increasingly online for information, and has become a major consumer of social media. "We're looking at YouTube, which carries some unique and honest-to-goodness intelligence," said Doug Naquin, director of the DNI Open Source Center (OSC) at CIA headquarters. "We're looking at chat rooms and things that didn't exist five years ago, and trying to stay ahead."[181] CIA launched a Twitter account in June 2014.[182] Outsourcing and privatization See also: Intelligence Outsourcing Many of the duties and functions of Intelligence Community activities, not the CIA alone, are being outsourced and privatized. Mike McConnell, former Director of National Intelligence, was about to publicize an investigation report of outsourcing by U.S. intelligence agencies, as required by Congress.[183] However, this report was then classified.[184][185] Hillhouse speculates that this report includes requirements for the CIA to report:[184][186] different standards for government employees and contractors; contractors providing similar services to government workers; analysis of costs of contractors vs. employees; an assessment of the appropriateness of outsourced activities; an estimate of the number of contracts and contractors; comparison of compensation for contractors and government employees; attrition analysis of government employees; descriptions of positions to be converted back to the employee model; an evaluation of accountability mechanisms; an evaluation of procedures for "conducting oversight of contractors to ensure identification and prosecution of criminal violations, financial waste, fraud, or other abuses committed by contractors or contract personnel"; and an "identification of best practices of accountability mechanisms within service contracts." According to investigative journalist Tim Shorrock: ...what we have today with the intelligence business is something far more systemic: senior officials leaving their national security and counterterrorism jobs for positions where they are basically doing the same jobs they once held at the CIA, the NSA and other agencies — but for double or triple the salary, and for profit. It's a privatization of the highest order, in which our collective memory and experience in intelligence — our crown jewels of spying, so to speak — are owned by corporate America. Yet, there is essentially no government oversight of this private sector at the heart of our intelligence empire. And the lines between public and private have become so blurred as to be nonexistent.[187][188] Congress has required an outsourcing report by March 30, 2008.[186] The Director of National Intelligence has been granted the authority to increase the number of positions (FTEs) on elements in the Intelligence Community by up to 10% should there be a determination that activities performed by a contractor should be done by a U.S. government employee."[186] Part of the contracting problem comes from Congressional restrictions on the number of employees in the IC. According to Hillhouse, this resulted in 70% of the de facto workforce of the CIA's National Clandestine Service being made up of contractors. "After years of contributing to the increasing reliance upon contractors, Congress is now providing a framework for the conversion of contractors into federal government employees—more or less."[186] As with most government agencies, building equipment often is contracted. The National Reconnaissance Office (NRO), responsible for the development and operation of airborne and spaceborne sensors, long was a joint operation of the CIA and the United States Department of Defense. NRO had been significantly involved in the design of such sensors, but the NRO, then under DCI authority, contracted more of the design that had been their tradition, and to a contractor without extensive reconnaissance experience, Boeing. The next-generation satellite Future Imagery Architecture project "how does heaven look", which missed objectives after $4 billion in cost overruns, was the result of this contract.[189][190] Some of the cost problems associated with intelligence come from one agency, or even a group within an agency, not accepting the compartmented security practices for individual projects, requiring expensive duplication.[191] Controversies See also: 1953 Iranian coup d'état, 1954 Guatemalan coup d'état, CIA activities in Indonesia, and Operation Condor Supplemental material used in Maxwell Taylor's report on the Bay of Pigs invasion THE CIA: a forgotten history, by William Blum[192] and Legacy of Ashes: The History of the CIA by Tim Weiner.[193] have accused the CIA of various covert actions, and human rights abuses. The CIA has responded to the claims made in Weiner's book,[194] and that Jeffrey T. Richelson of the National Security Archive has also been critical of it.[195] Extraordinary rendition Further information: Extraordinary rendition, Black site and Rendition aircraft The US Senate Report on CIA Detention Interrogation Program that details the use of torture during CIA detention and interrogation. Extraordinary rendition is the apprehension and extrajudicial transfer of a person from one country to another.[196] The term "torture by proxy" is used by some critics to describe situations in which the CIA[197][198][199][200] and other US agencies have transferred suspected terrorists to countries known to employ torture, whether they meant to enable torture or not. It has been claimed, though, that torture has been employed with the knowledge or acquiescence of US agencies (a transfer of anyone to anywhere for the purpose of torture is a violation of US law), although Condoleezza Rice (then the United States Secretary of State) stated that: the United States has not transported anyone, and will not transport anyone, to a country when we believe he will be tortured. Where appropriate, the United States seeks assurances that transferred persons will not be tortured.[201] Whilst the Obama administration has tried to distance itself from some of the harshest counterterrorism techniques, it has also said that at least some forms of renditions will continue.[202] Currently the administration continues to allow rendition only "to a country with jurisdiction over that individual (for prosecution of that individual)" when there is a diplomatic assurance "that they will not be treated inhumanely."[203][204] The US programme has also prompted several official investigations in Europe into alleged secret detentions and unlawful inter-state transfers involving Council of Europe member states. A June 2006 report from the Council of Europe estimated 100 people had been kidnapped by the CIA on EU territory (with the cooperation of Council of Europe members), and rendered to other countries, often after having transited through secret detention centres ("black sites") used by the CIA, some located in Europe. According to the separate European Parliament report of February 2007, the CIA has conducted 1,245 flights, many of them to destinations where suspects could face torture, in violation of article 3 of the United Nations Convention Against Torture.[205] Following the 11 September 2001 attacks the United States, in particular the CIA, has been accused of rendering hundreds of people suspected by the government of being terrorists—or of aiding and abetting terrorist organisations—to third-party states such as Egypt, Jordan, Morocco, and Uzbekistan. Such "ghost detainees" are kept outside judicial oversight, often without ever entering US territory, and may or may not ultimately be devolved to the custody of the United States.[206][207] On October 4, 2001, a secret arrangement is made in Brussels, by all members of NATO. Lord George Robertson, British defence secretary and later NATO's secretary-general, will later explain NATO members agree to provide "blanket overflight clearances for the United States and other allies' aircraft for military flights related to operations against terrorism."[208] Security failures Critics assert that funding the Afghan mujahideen (Operation Cyclone) played a role in causing the September 11 attacks. On December 30, 2009, a suicide attack occurred in the Forward Operating Base Chapman attack in the province of Khost, Afghanistan. Seven CIA officers, including the chief of the base, were killed and six others seriously wounded in the attack.[209] Counterintelligence failures Perhaps the most disruptive period involving counterintelligence was James Jesus Angleton's search for a mole,[210] based on the statements of a Soviet defector, Anatoliy Golitsyn. A second defector, Yuri Nosenko, challenged Golitsyn's claims, with the two calling one another Soviet double agents.[211] Many CIA officers fell under career-ending suspicion; the details of the relative truths and untruths from Nosenko and Golitsyn may never be released, or, in fact, may not be fully understood. The accusations also crossed the Atlantic to the British intelligence services, who also were damaged by molehunts.[212] Edward Lee Howard, David Henry Barnett, both field operations officers sold secrets to Russia, and William Kampiles, a low-level worker in the CIA 24-hour Operations Center. Kampiles sold the Soviets the detailed operational manual for the KH-11 reconnaissance satellite.[213] Human rights concerns Main article: CIA transnational human rights actions See also: Senate Intelligence Committee report on CIA torture Operation Condor participants. Green: active members. Blue: collaborator (USA). The CIA has been called into question for, at times, using torture, funding and training of groups and organizations that would later participate in killing of civilians and other non-combatants and would try or succeed in overthrowing democratically elected governments, human experimentation, and targeted killings and assassinations. The CIA has also been accused of a lack of financial and whistleblower controls which has led to waste and fraud.[214] The Institute on Medicine as a Profession and the non-profit organization Open Society Foundations reviewed public records into the medical professions alleging complicity in the abuse of prisoners suspected of terrorism who were held in U.S. custody during the years after 9/11."[215][216] The reports found that health professionals "Aided cruel and degrading interrogations; Helped devise and implement practices designed to maximize disorientation and anxiety so as to make detainees more malleable for interrogation; and Participated in the application of excruciatingly painful methods of force-feeding of mentally competent detainees carrying out hunger strikes" are not all that surprising.[215] Medical professionals were sometimes used at black sites to monitor detainee health.[217] Whether or not the physicians were compelled is an open question. External investigations and document releases Main article: Official reports by the U.S. Government on the CIA Several investigations (e.g., the Church Committee, Rockefeller Commission, Pike Committee, etc.) have been conducted about the CIA, and many documents have been declassified.[218] Influencing public opinion and law enforcement See also: CIA influence on public opinion, CIA and the media, CIA in fiction, Robertson Panel, and Operation Mockingbird The CIA sometimes finds itself in conflict with other parts of the government when there is disagreement over the legality of specific covert programs. There is always the risk that one part of the government may make the covert operations of another part of the government public.[219] Drug trafficking Main articles: CIA transnational anti-crime and anti-drug activities and Allegations of CIA drug trafficking Two offices of CIA Directorate of Analysis have analytical responsibilities in this area. The Office of Transnational Issues[220] applies unique functional expertise to assess existing and emerging threats to U.S. national security and provides the most senior U.S. policymakers, military planners, and law enforcement with analysis, warning, and crisis support. CIA Crime and Narcotics Center[221] researches information on international narcotics trafficking and organized crime for policymakers and the law enforcement community. Since CIA has no domestic police authority, it sends its analytic information to the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI), Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) and other law enforcement organizations, such as the Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA) and the Office of Foreign Assets Control of the United States Department of the Treasury (OFAC). Another part of CIA, the Directorate of Operations, collects human intelligence (HUMINT) in these areas. Research by Dr. Alfred W. McCoy, Gary Webb, and others has pointed to CIA involvement in narcotics trafficking across the globe, although the CIA officially denies such allegations.[222][223] During the Cold War, when numerous soldiers participated in transport of Southeast Asian heroin to the United States by the airline Air America[citation needed], the CIA's role in such traffic was reportedly rationalized as "recapture" of related profits to prevent possible enemy control of such assets. Alleged lying to Congress Former Speaker of the United States House of Representatives Nancy Pelosi has stated that the CIA repeatedly misled the Congress since 2001 about waterboarding and other torture, though Pelosi admitted to being told about the programs.[224][225] Six members of Congress have claimed that Director of the CIA Leon Panetta admitted that over a period of several years since 2001 the CIA deceived Congress, including affirmatively lying to Congress.[226] Some congressmen believe that these "lies" to Congress are similar to CIA lies to Congress from earlier periods.[227] Covert programs hidden from Congress On July 10, 2009, House Intelligence subcommittee Chairwoman Representative Jan Schakowsky (D, IL) announced the termination of an unnamed CIA covert program described as "very serious" in nature which had been kept secret from Congress for eight years.[228] It's not as if this was an oversight and over the years it just got buried. There was a decision under several directors of the CIA and administration not to tell the Congress. Jan Schakowsky, Chairwoman, U.S. House of Representatives Intelligence Subcommittee CIA Director Panetta had ordered an internal investigation to determine why Congress had not been informed about the covert program. Chairman of the House Intelligence Committee Representative Silvestre Reyes announced that he is considering an investigation into alleged CIA violations of the National Security Act, which requires with limited exception that Congress be informed of covert activities. Investigations and Oversight Subcommittee Chairwoman Schakowsky indicated that she would forward a request for congressional investigation to HPSCI Chairman Silvestre Reyes. "Director Panetta did brief us two weeks ago—I believe it was on the 24th of June—... and, as had been reported, did tell us that he was told that the vice president had ordered that the program not be briefed to the Congress." Dianne Feinstein, Chairwoman of the U.S. Senate Select Committee on Intelligence As mandated by Title 50 of the United States Code Chapter 15, Subchapter III, when it becomes necessary to limit access to covert operations findings that could affect vital interests of the U.S., as soon as possible the President must report at a minimum to the Gang of Eight (the leaders of each of the two parties from both the Senate and House of Representatives, and the chairs and ranking members of both the Senate Committee and House Committee for intelligence).[229] The House is expected to support the 2010 Intelligence Authorization Bill including a provision that would require the President to inform more than 40 members of Congress about covert operations. The Obama administration threatened to veto the final version of a bill that included such a provision.[230][231] On July 16, 2008 the fiscal 2009 Intelligence Authorization Bill was approved by House majority containing stipulations that 75% of money sought for covert actions would be held until all members of the House Intelligence panel were briefed on sensitive covert actions. Under the George W. Bush administration, senior advisers to the President issued a statement indicating that if a bill containing this provision reached the President, they would recommend that he veto the bill.[232] The program was rumored vis-à-vis leaks made by anonymous government officials on July 23, to be an assassinations program,[233][234] but this remains unconfirmed. "The whole committee was stunned....I think this is as serious as it gets," stated Anna Eshoo, Chairman, Subcommittee on Intelligence Community Management, U.S. House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence (HPSCI). Allegations by Director Panetta indicate that details of a secret counterterrorism program were withheld from Congress under orders from former U.S. Vice President Dick Cheney. This prompted Senator Feinstein and Senator Patrick Leahy, chairman of the Senate Judiciary Committee to insist that no one should go outside the law.[235] "The agency hasn't discussed publicly the nature of the effort, which remains classified," said agency spokesman Paul Gimigliano.[236] The Wall Street Journal reported, citing former intelligence officials familiar with the matter, that the program was an attempt to carry out a 2001 presidential authorization to capture or kill al-Qaeda operatives.[237] Intelligence Committee investigation On July 17, 2009, the House Intelligence Committee said it was launching a formal investigation into the secret program.[238] Representative Silvestre Reyes announced the probe will look into "whether there was any past decision or direction to withhold information from the committee". "Is giving your kid a test in school an inhibition on his free learning?" Holt said. "Sure, there are some people who are happy to let intelligence agencies go about their business unexamined. But I think most people when they think about it will say that you will get better intelligence if the intelligence agencies don't operate in an unexamined fashion." Rush Holt, Chairman, House Select Intelligence Oversight Panel, Committee on Appropriations[239] Congresswoman Jan Schakowsky (D, IL), Chairman of the Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations, who called for the investigation, stated that the investigation was intended to address CIA failures to inform Congress fully or accurately about four issues: C.I.A. involvement in the downing of a missionary plane mistaken for a narcotics flight in Peru in 2001, and two "matters that remain classified", as well as the rumored-assassinations question. In addition, the inquiry is likely to look at the Bush administration's program of eavesdropping without warrants and its detention and interrogation program.[240] U.S. Intelligence Chief Dennis Blair testified before the House Intelligence Committee on February 3, 2010 that the U.S. intelligence community is prepared to kill U.S. citizens if they threaten other Americans or the United States.[241] The American Civil Liberties Union has said this policy is "particularly troubling" because U.S. citizens "retain their constitutional right to due process even when abroad." The ACLU also "expressed serious concern about the lack of public information about the policy and the potential for abuse of unchecked executive power."[242] Improper search of computers used by Senate investigators In July 2014 CIA Director John O. Brennan had to apologize to lawmakers because five CIA employees (two lawyers and three computer specialists) had surreptitiously searched Senate Intelligence Committee files and reviewed some committee staff members' e-mail on computers that were supposed to be exclusively for congressional investigators. Brennan ordered the creation of an internal personnel board, led by former senator Evan Bayh, to review the agency employees' conduct and determine "potential disciplinary measures."[243] However, according to some reports, Brennan didn't apologize for spying or doing anything wrong at all, even though his agency had been improperly accessing computers of the Senate Select Intelligence Committee (SSCI) and then, in the words of investigative reporter Dan Froomkin, "speaking a lie". This accusation was based on the CIA Director's earlier denials of Senator Dianne Feinstein's claims that the surreptitious CIA search of the SSCI computers occurred, was inappropriate, or "violated the separation of powers principles embodied in the United States Constitution, including the Speech and Debate clause" or other laws.[244][245][246] In fiction Main article: CIA in fiction Fictional depictions of the CIA exist in many books, films and video games. Some fiction draws, at least in parts, on actual historical events, while other works are entirely fictional. Films include Charlie Wilson's War (2007), based on the story of U.S. Congressman Charlie Wilson and CIA operative Gust Avrakotos, who supported the Afghan mujahideen, and The Good Shepherd (2006), a fictional spy film produced and directed by Robert De Niro based loosely on the development of counter-intelligence in the CIA. The fictional character Jack Ryan in Tom Clancy's books is a CIA analyst.[247]Graham Greene's The Quiet American is about a CIA agent operating in Southeast Asia.[248] Fictional depictions of the CIA are also used in video games, such as Tom Clancy's Splinter Cell, Call of Duty: Modern Warfare 2 and Call of Duty: Black Ops. See also Government of the United States portal Intelligence portal Title 32 of the Code of Federal Regulations Abu Omar case Covert United States foreign regime change actions George Bush Center for Intelligence National Intelligence Board Project MKUltra Reagan Doctrine The World Factbook, published by the CIA United States and state-sponsored terrorism Intellipedia Kryptos United States Department of Homeland Security Operation Peter Pan U.S. Army and CIA interrogation manuals United States Intelligence Community Notes ^ "History of the CIA, CIA official Web site". Cia.gov. Retrieved March 28, 2014.  ^ "CIA Observes 50th Anniversary of Original Headquarters Building Cornerstone Laying – Central Intelligence Agency". Central Intelligence Agency. Retrieved September 18, 2012.  ^ a b c d e f g h Gellman, Barton; Greg Miller (August 29, 2013). "U.S. spy network's successes, failures and objectives detailed in 'black budget' summary". The Washington Post. Retrieved August 29, 2013.  ^ Kopel, Dave (July 28, 1997). "CIA Budget: An Unnecessary Secret". Retrieved April 15, 2007.  ^ "Cloak Over the CIA Budget". November 29, 1999. Retrieved July 4, 2008.  ^ Aftergood, Steven (October 6, 2011). "Reducing Overclassification Through Accountability". Federation of American Scientists Secrecy News. Retrieved February 3, 2012.  ^ Woodward, Bob (November 18, 2001). "Secret CIA Units Playing Central Combat Role". Washington Post. Retrieved February 26, 2012.  ^ "World Leaders-Paraguay". United States Central Intelligence Agency. Retrieved April 14, 2011.  ^ Eimer, Charlotte (September 28, 2005). "Spotlight on US troops in Paraguay". BBC News. Retrieved April 18, 2011.  ^ Phillips, Tom (October 23, 2006). "Paraguay in a spin about Bush's alleged 100,000 acre hideaway". The Guardian (London). Retrieved April 18, 2011.  ^ Commission on the Roles and Capabilities of the United States Intelligence Community. "Preparing for the 21st Century: An Appraisal of U.S. Intelligence. Chapter 13 - The Cost of Intelligence".  ^ Barton Gellman and Ellen Nakashima (September 3, 2013). "U.S. spy agencies mounted 231 offensive cyber-operations in 2011, documents show". The Washington Post.  ^ "Leadership". cia.gov.  ^ "CIA Support to the US Military During the Persian Gulf War". Central Intelligence Agency. June 16, 1997.  ^ https://www.cia.gov/about-cia/leadership/ciaorgchart.jpg/image.jpg ^ "Fifty Years of Service to the Nation". cia.gov. July 16, 2006.  ^ Central Intelligence Agency. "Intelligence & Analysis". Retrieved July 1, 2011.  ^ Miller, Greg, ed. (December 1, 2012). "DIA to send hundreds more spies overseas". The Washington Post.  ^ Blanton, Thomas S.; Evans, Michael L.; Martin, Kate (July 17, 2000). "Defense HUMINT Service Organizational Chart". The "Death Squad Protection" Act: Senate Measure Would Restrict Public Access to Crucial Human Rights Information Under the Freedom of Information Act. George Washington University National Security Archive Electronic Briefing Book No. 34.  ^ Pocock, Chris, "50 Years of the U-2: The Complete Illustrated History of the 'Dragon Lady' ", Schiffer Publishing, Ltd., Atglen, Pennsylvania, Library of Congress card number 2005927577, ISBN 0-7643-2346-6, page 404. ^ a b c Wendt, Jeff. "A feature interview with Frans Bax, President, CIA University". Today's Campus.  ^ a b Host: Mary Louise Kelly (May 28, 2004). "Inside CIA University: Higher Ed for Operatives". Morning Edition. NPR.  ^ a b "History". Central Intelligence Agency. January 23, 2013. Archived from the original on April 30, 2013.  ^ "Life in HR: Learning Resources". Central Intelligence Agency. February 12, 2013. Archived from the original on April 29, 2013.  ^ "Training Resources". Central Intelligence Agency. January 23, 2013. Retrieved April 3, 2013.  ^ The OSS Assessment Staff (1969) [1948 original printing by Rinehart and Company, Inc.]. Assessment of Men, Selection of Personnel for the Office of Strategic Services. Johnson Reprint Corporation.  ^ Weiner, Tim (March 20, 1998). "Is the Explosion-Noisy Base a C.I.A. Spy School? What Base?". New York Times.  ^ Pike, John (2001). "Warrenton Station B". Federation of American Scientists. Archived from the original on June 5, 2009. Retrieved March 18, 2013.  ^ CIA-RDP86B00269R000100110003-5 (PDF), Central Intelligence Agency, October 31, 1954, retrieved March 27, 2013  ^ Pedlow, Gregory W.; Welzenbach, Donald E. (1992). The Central Intelligence Agency and Overhead Reconnaissance: The U-2 and OXCART Programs, 1954-1974. Washington DC: History Staff, Central Intelligence Agency. pp. 43–44.  CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list (link) ^ "Declaration of Steven Aftergood". May 5, 2003. Case No. 02-1146 (RMU).  ^ "CIA Cost Reduction Program" (PDF). Central Intelligence Agency. September 1, 1965.  ^ "CIA Discloses FY 1998 Intelligence Budget Total". FAS. March 20, 1998.  ^ Shane, Scott (November 8, 2005). "Official Reveals Budget for U.S. Intelligence". The New York Times. Retrieved April 29, 2013.  ^ Legacy of Ashes, p.28 ^ "Exclusive: Dozens of CIA operatives on the ground during Benghazi attack." CNN. August 1, 2013. Retrieved on August 2, 2013. ^ US Defense Information Services Agency (March 19, 1999). "Zdarm (Defense Messaging Service) Genser (General Service) Message Security Classifications, Categories, and Marking Phrase Requirements Version 1.2" (PDF).  ^ "Spiegel Online on February 8, 2013: "Verbindungsstelle 61": Ermittlungen gegen Chef von geheimer BND-Gruppe". Spiegel.de. February 8, 2013. Retrieved March 28, 2014.  ^ "Secret army squad keeps watch on 60 Al Qaeda in Ireland". Daily Star Ireland. March 26, 2013. Retrieved June 7, 2014.  ^ "Army & Navy - MERGER: Navy Compromise". TIME.com. December 10, 1945.  ^ Factbook on Intelligence. Central Intelligence Agency. December 1992. pp. 4–5.  ^ "The Role of Intelligence" (1965). Congress and the Nation 1945-1964: a review of government and politics in the postwar years. Washington, DC: Congressional Quarterly Service. p.306. ^ Warner, Michael. "The Creation of the Central Intelligence Group" (PDF). cia.gov. Retrieved September 16, 2011.  ^ a b "CIA - History". fas.org.  ^ https://www.cia.gov/mobile/offices-of-cia/general-counsel/history-of-the-office.html ^ http://media.nara.gov/dc-metro/rg-263/6922330/Box-9-109-3/263-a1-27-box-9-109-3.pdf ^ Zegart, Amy B. (September 23, 2007). "The CIA's license to fail". Los Angeles Times.  ^ "George Tenet v. John Doe" (PDF). Federation of American Scientists. July 16, 2006. Retrieved July 4, 2008.  ^ "Foreign Relations of the United States, 1945–1950, Emergence of the Intelligence Establishment - Historical Documents - Office of the Historian". state.gov.  ^ a b http://www.foia.cia.gov/sites/default/files/document_conversions/44/2010-05-01.pdf ^ a b Weiner 2007, p. 14. ^ a b c https://www.cia.gov/library/center-for-the-study-of-intelligence/kent-csi/vol38no1/pdf/v38i1a06p.pdf ^ "A Look Back: The First Director of Central Intelligence". cia.gov.  ^ Weiner 2007, p. 17. ^ "U.S. Department of State: Foreign Relations of the United States, 1945–1950, Emergence of the Intelligence Establishment". state.gov. Document 292, Section 5. Retrieved July 4, 2008.  ^ Weiner 2007, p. 29. ^ Weiner 2007, p. 33. ^ "Two Strategic Intelligence Mistakes in Korea, 1950". cia.gov.  ^ "The Role of Intelligence" (1965) Congress and the Nation 1945-1964. p.306 ^ Weiner 2007, p. 51. ^ American visions of the Netherlands East Indies/Indonesia: US foreign policy and Indonesian nationalism, 1920–1949, Frances Gouda, Thijs Brocades Zaalberg. Amsterdam University Press, 2002. ISBN 90-5356-479-9, ISBN 978-90-5356-479-0. p. 365 ^ Gouda 2007, p. 365. ^ Weiner 2007, p. 27. ^ a b c Weiner 2007, p. 56. ^ a b c Weiner 2007, p. 57. ^ Weiner 2007, p. 58. ^ a b Weiner 2007, pp. 58-61. ^ a b Gasiorowski, Mark; Byrne, Malcolm (2004). Mohammad Mosaddeq and the 1953 Coup in Iran. Syracuse University Press. p. 360. ISBN 9780815630180.  ^ a b Weiner 2007, p. 87. ^ Weiner 2007, p. 90. ^ Weiner 2007, p. 91. ^ Weiner 2007, p. 93. ^ Weiner 2007, p. 95. ^ a b Immerman 1982, pp. 161–170. ^ a b c Immerman 1982, pp. 173–178. ^ Nick Cullather, with an afterword by Piero Gleijeses "Secret History: The CIA's Classified Account of Its Operations in Guatemala, 1952–1954". Stanford University Press, 2006. ^ Piero Gleijeses. "Shattered Hope: The Guatemalan Revolution and the United States, 1944–1954". Princeton University Press, 1992. ^ Stephen M. Streeter. "Managing the Counterrevolution: The United States and Guatemala, 1954–1961". Ohio University Press, 2000. ^ Gordon L. Bowen. "U.S. Foreign Policy toward Radical Change: Covert Operations in Guatemala, 1950–1954". Latin American Perspectives, 1983, Vol. 10, No. 1, p. 88-102. ^ Stephen Schlesinger (3 June 2011). Ghosts of Guatemala’s Past. The New York Times. Retrieved 5 July 2014. ^ a b Weiner 2007, p. 139. ^ Weiner 2007, p. 143. ^ Weiner 2007, p. 145. ^ Weiner 2007, p. 146. ^ Weiner 2007, p. 148. ^ Weiner 2007, p. 153. ^ Weiner 2007, p. 154. ^ Weiner 2007, p. 163. ^ Weiner, Tim (2007). Legacy of ashes : the history of the CIA (1st ed.). New York: Doubleday. p. 702. ISBN 978-0-385-51445-3.  ^ Weiner 2007, p. 172. ^ Weiner 2007, p. 161. ^ "The Role of Intelligence" (1965). Congress and the Nation. p. 306 ^ Schecter, Jerrold L.; Deriabin, Peter S. (1992). The Spy Who Saved the World: How a Soviet Colonel Changed the Course of the Cold War. Scribner. ISBN 0-684-19068-0.  ^ Gibbs, David N. (1995). "Let Us Forget Unpleasant Memories: The US State Department's Analysis of the Congo Crisis". Journal of Modern African Studies 33 (1): 175–180. doi:10.1017/s0022278x0002098x. JSTOR 161559. There seems little doubt that the Congo was targeted by one of the largest covert operations in the history of the CIA, and its significance has been noted repeatedly by former officers, as well as by scholars. Americans in both the CIA station and the embassy directly intervened in Congolese affairs, bribing parliamentarians, setting up special units of the military, and promoting the career of General Mobutu. In addition to any assassination plots, it is well documented that the United States played an important role in two efforts to overthrow Lumumba, both in September 1960....  ^ Patti, Archimedes L. A (1980). Why Viet Nam?: Prelude to America's albatross. University of California Press. ISBN 0-520-04156-9.  ^ "Status Report on Tibetan Operations". Office of the Historian. January 26, 1968.  ^ Adams, Sam (1994). War of Numbers: an Intelligence Memoir. Steerforth Press. ISBN 1-883642-23-X.  ^ Weiner 2007, p. 213. ^ Weiner 2007, p. 237. ^ Weiner 2007, p. 248. ^ Weiner 2007, p. 319. ^ Weiner 2007, p. 321. ^ a b Weiner 2007, p. 322. ^ Weiner 2007, p. 323. ^ a b c Frum, David (2000). How We Got Here: The '70s. New York, New York: Basic Books. pp. 49–51. ISBN 0-465-04195-7.  ^ Carl Colby (director) (September 2011). The Man Nobody Knew: In Search of My Father, CIA Spymaster William Colby (Motion picture). New York City: Act 4 Entertainment. Retrieved 2011.  ^ Weiner 2007, p. 347. ^ http://foreignpolicy.com/2014/01/24/our-man-in-africa/ ^ http://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/jul/03/chad-hissene-habre-charged ^ "The Cost of an Afghan 'Victory'". The Nation. 1999. Archived from the original on 2014-03-02. Retrieved 16 December 2013.  ^ "Afghanistan war logs: US covered up fatal Taliban missile strike on Chinook". The Guardian. 25 July 2010.  ^ "Story of US, CIA and Taliban". The Brunei Times. 2009. Archived from the original on 2013-12-05. Retrieved 16 December 2013.  ^ West, Julian (2001-09-23). "Pakistan's 'godfathers of the Taliban' hold the key to hunt for bin Laden". London: Telegraph.co.uk. Retrieved 2011-04-09.  ^ a b Weiner 2007, p. 380. ^ Weiner 2007, p. 397. ^ Richard T. Davies, "The CIA and the Polish Crisis of 1980–1981." Journal of Cold War Studies (2004) 6#3 pp: 120-123. online ^ Gregory F. Domber (2008). Supporting the Revolution: America, Democracy, and the End of the Cold War in Poland, 1981--1989. ProQuest. p. 199. , revised as Domber 2014, p. 110 [1]. ^ Domber, Gregory F. (28 August 2014), What Putin Misunderstands about American Power, University of California Press Blog, University of North Carolina Press  ^ MacEachin, Douglas J. "US Intelligence and the Polish Crisis 1980–1981." CIA. June 28, 2008. ^ Cover Story: The Holy Alliance By Carl Bernstein Sunday, June 24, 2001 ^ Branding Democracy: U.S. Regime Change in Post-Soviet Eastern Europe Gerald Sussman, page 128 ^ Looking to the Future: Essays on International Law in Honor of W. Michael Reisman ^ Executive Secrets: Covert Action and the Presidency William J. Daugherty. page 201-203 ^ Rainer Thiel in "Nested Games of External Democracy Promotion: The United States and the Polish Liberalization 1980-1989" page 273 ^ Weiner 2007, p. 428. ^ Weiner 2007, p. 429. ^ Weiner 2007, p. 430. ^ Weiner 2007, p. 459. ^ Weiner 2007, p. 465. ^ Weiner 2007, p. 466. ^ Weiner 2007, p. 470. ^ Weiner 2007, p. 448. ^ Weiner 2007, p. 450. ^ "FBI History: Famous Cases — Aldrich Hazen Ames". Federal Bureau of Investigation. Archived from the original on June 11, 2008. Retrieved July 4, 2008.  ^ Weiner 2007, p. 460. ^ Weiner 2007, p. 480. ^ Mayer, Jane (September 11, 2006). "Junior: The clandestine life of America's top Al Qaeda source". The New Yorker. Retrieved February 28, 2014.  ^ Tenet, George; Harlow, Bill (2007). At the Center of the Storm: My Years at the CIA. New York: HarperCollins. pp. 119, 120. ISBN 0-06-114778-8. OCLC 71163669.  ^ a b Risen, James (November 4, 2001). "A NATION CHALLENGED: THE INTELLIGENCE AGENCY; Secret C.I.A. Site in New York Was Destroyed on Sept. 11". The New York Times. Retrieved December 3, 2013.  ^ Schmitt, Eric (October 22, 2001). "A NATION CHALLENGED: THE INTELLIGENCE AGENCIES; Job Seekers Flood Spy Agencies". The New York Times. Retrieved December 3, 2013.  ^ Bush, George W. "President George W. Bush's Address To The Nation on September 11, 2001". YouTube. YouTube. Retrieved December 3, 2013.  ^ a b Public Broadcasting Service. "Fighting on Two Fronts: A Chronology". PBS Frontline. Retrieved December 3, 2013.  ^ Tenet, George; Harlow, Bill (2007). At the Center of the Storm: My Years at the CIA. New York: HarperCollins. pp. 121–2; cf. p.177–8. ISBN 0-06-114778-8. OCLC 71163669.  ^ "Same US military unit that got Osama bin laden [sic] killed Anwar al-Awlaki", The Telegraph, UK (September 30, 2011)". London: Telegraph.co.uk. September 30, 2011. Retrieved February 12, 2012.  ^ Mark Mazzetti, Eric Schmitt and Robert F. Worth (September 30, 2011). "Two-Year Manhunt Led to Killing of Awlaki in Yemen". New York Times. Retrieved November 29, 2013.  ^ Shah, Saeed (July 11, 2011). "CIA organised fake vaccination drive to get Osama bin Laden's family DNA". The Guardian (London). Retrieved 2015-03-12.  ^ See pages 198 to 202 of Jones, Milo L. and; Silberzahn, Philippe (2013). Constructing Cassandra, Reframing Intelligence Failure at the CIA, 1947-2001. Stanford University Press. ISBN 978-0804793360.  ^ David Stout, Mark Mazzetti (August 21, 2007). "Tenet's C.I.A. Unprepared for Qaeda Threat, Report Says". The New York Times. Retrieved July 4, 2008.  ^ "CIA criticises ex-chief over 9/11". BBC News online. August 22, 2007. Retrieved December 31, 2009.  ^ "Transcript of a recording of a meeting between President Richard Nixon and H. R. Haldeman in the oval office". hpol.org. June 23, 1972. Retrieved July 4, 2008.  ^ Gray III, L. Patrick; Ed Gray (2008). In Nixon's Web:A Year in the Crosshairs of Watergate. Times Books/Henry Holt. ISBN 0-8050-8256-5.  ^ a b c d e Woodward, Bob (2004). Plan of Attack. New York: Simon & Schuster. p. 467. ISBN 074325547X.  ^ Weiner 2007, p. 491. ^ Weiner 2007, p. 496. ^ Tucker, Mike; Charles Faddis (2008). Operation Hotel California: The Clandestine War inside Iraq. The Lyons Press. ISBN 978-1-59921-366-8.  ^ "An interview on public radio with the author". Retrieved March 16, 2010.  ^ Weiner 2007, p. 493. ^ "Executive Order 13470". Fas.org. Retrieved March 16, 2010.  ^ "Bush Orders Intelligence Overhaul". [dead link] ^ "Osama Bin Laden killed in CIA operation". The Washington Post. May 8, 2011.  ^ Dilanian, Ken (May 2, 2011). "CIA led U.S. special forces mission against Osama bin Laden". Los Angeles Times.  ^ Gaffney, Frank J., Jr. (May 2, 2011). "GAFFNEY: Bin Laden's welcome demise". The Washington Times. Retrieved August 19, 2011.  ^ Gertz, Bill (May 2, 2011). "Intelligence break led to bin Laden's hide-out". The Washington Times. Retrieved August 19, 2011.  ^ Schwartz, Mathew J. (May 5, 2011). "Cracking Bin Laden's Hard Drives". InformationWeek. Retrieved August 20, 2011.  ^ "Osama bin Laden dead: CIA paramilitaries and elite Navy SEAL killed Al Qaeda leader". The Economic Times. May 2, 2011. Archived from the original on June 29, 2011. Retrieved August 19, 2011. [dead link] ^ "Counterterrorism chief declares al-Qaida 'in the past'". MSNBC. May 2, 2011. Retrieved August 19, 2011.  ^ Ross, Tim (May 4, 2011). "Osama bin Laden dead: trusted courier led US special forces to hideout". The Daily Telegraph (London).  ^ "Debate rages about role of torture". CNN. May 20, 2011.  ^ Miller, Greg (May 5, 2011 (updated May 6, 2011)). "CIA spied on bin Laden from safe house". The Washington Post. Retrieved August 19, 2011.  Check date values in: |date= (help) ^ Mazzetti, Mark; Cooper, Helene; Baker, Peter (May 2, 2011). "Clues Gradually Led to the Location of Osama bin Laden". The New York Times.  ^ "Pakistan rattled by news of CIA safe house in Abbottabad". CBS News. May 6, 2011. Archived from the original on May 9, 2011.  ^ "Secret CIA effort in Syria faces large funding cut". The Washington Post. 12 June 2015.  ^ "U.S. has secretly provided arms training to Syria rebels since 2012". Los Angeles Times. 21 June 2013.  ^ "The terrorists fighting us now? We just finished training them.". The Washington Post. 18 August 2014.  ^ "US air strikes in Syria driving anti-Assad groups to support Isis". The Guardian. 23 November 2014.  ^ a b c "Unclassified Version of March 6, 2015 Message to the Workforce from CIA Director John Brennan: Our Agency's Blueprint for the Future". March 6, 2015.  ^ Mercado, Stephen (April 15, 2007). "Reexamining the Distinction Between Open Information and Secrets". Central Intelligence Agency Center for the Study of Intelligence. Retrieved July 4, 2008.  ^ "Joint Publications Research Service (JPRS)". Harvard College Library. Retrieved July 1, 2011.  ^ Smith, Esther (May 5, 1988). "DoD Unveils Competitive Tool: Project Socrates Offers Valuable Analysis". Washington Technology.  ^ Wrubel, Robert (July 10, 1990). "The Frontal Assault: A Conversation with Michael Sekora". Financial World.  ^ Thomas Claburn (February 6, 2008). "CIA Monitors YouTube For Intelligence". InformationWeek. Retrieved February 11, 2008.  ^ Pfeiffer, Eric. "CIA outwits impersonators by embracing Twitter, Facebook" Yahoo News, June 6, 2014. ^ "Intelligence Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2008, Conference Committee Report" (PDF). December 6, 2007.  ^ a b Hillhouse, R.J. (July 8, 2007). "Who Runs the CIA? Outsiders for Hire.". washingtonpost.com. Retrieved July 4, 2008.  ^ Keefe, Patrick Radden (June 25, 2007). "Don't Privatize Our Spies". The New York Times. Retrieved July 4, 2008.  ^ a b c d Hillhouse, R.J. (December 18, 2007). "CIA Contractors: Double or Nothin'".  ^ Shorrock, Tim (May 29, 2008). "Former high-ranking Bush officials enjoy war profits". Salon.com. Retrieved June 16, 2008.  ^ Hurt III, Harry (June 15, 2008). "The Business of Intelligence Gathering". The New York Times. Retrieved June 18, 2008.  ^ Butler, Amy (March 20, 2005). "SBIRS High in the Red Again". Aviation Week.  ^ Taubman, Philip (November 11, 2007). "In Death of Spy Satellite Program, Lofty Plans and Unrealistic Bids". The New York Times. Retrieved April 29, 2013.  ^ Rich, Ben R. (1996). Skunk Works: A Personal Memoir of My Years of Lockheed. Back Bay Books. ISBN 0-316-74330-5.  ^ Blum, William (1986). THE CIA: a forgotten history. Zed Books. ISBN 0-86232-480-7.  ^ Weiner, Tim (2007). Legacy of Ashes. Doubleday. ISBN 978-0-385-51445-3.  ^ "Review of 'Legacy of Ashes: The History of CIA' by Nicholas Dujmovic, CIA Center for the Study of Intelligence, November 26, 2007". Cia.gov. Retrieved February 12, 2012.  ^ Richelson, Jeffrey (September 11, 2007). "Sins of Omission and Commission". Retrieved July 4, 2008.  ^ Michael John Garcia, Legislative Attorney American Law Division. Renditions: Constraints Imposed by Laws on Torture September 8, 2009; link from the United States Counter-Terrorism Training and Resources for Law Enforcement web site ^ Charlie Savage, "Obama's War on Terror May Resemble Bush's in Some Areas". The New York Times. February 17, 2009. Retrieved January 2, 2010. ^ "Background Paper on CIA's Combined Use of Interrogation Techniques". December 30, 2004. Retrieved January 2, 2010. ^ "New CIA Docs Detail Brutal 'Extraordinary Rendition' Process". Huffington Post. August 28, 2009. Retrieved January 2, 2010. ^ Fact sheet: Extraordinary rendition, American Civil Liberties Union. Retrieved March 29, 2007 (English) ^ "Remarks of Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice Upon Her Departure for Europe, 5 Dec 2005". U.S. State Department. Retrieved August 17, 2012.  ^ "Obama preserves renditions as counter-terrorism tool". LA Times February 1, 2009. Access November 21, 2011. ^ Erdbrink, Thomas (September 1, 2011). "N.Y. billing dispute reveals details of secret CIA rendition flights". The Washington Post.  ^ "Renditions—and Secrecy Around Them—Continue". 2011. Retrieved October 7, 2011.  Panetta's clarification of current US "Rendition policy". ^ Resolution 1507 (2006). Alleged secret detentions and unlawful inter-state transfers of detainees involving Council of Europe member states ^ Mayer, Jane. The New Yorker, February 14, 2005. "Outsourcing Torture: The secret history of America's 'extraordinary rendition' program.". Retrieved February 20, 2007.  ^ According to former CIA case officer Bob Baer, "If you want a serious interrogation, you send a prisoner to Jordan. If you want them to be tortured, you send them to Syria. If you want someone to disappear—never to see them again—you send them to Egypt." The CIA's Rendition Flights to Secret Prisons: The Torture-Go-Round By Lila Rajiva in CounterPunch, December 5, 2005 ^ Grey, Stephen (November 25, 2007). "Flight logs reveal secret rendition". The Sunday Times (London). Retrieved February 22, 2009.  ^ Rubin, Alissa J.; Mazzetti, Mark (December 31, 2009). "Afghan Base Hit by Attack Has Pivotal Role in Conflict". New York Times. NYtimes.com. Retrieved January 1, 2010. ^ Wise, David (1992). Molehunt: The Secret Search for Traitors That Shattered the CIA. Random House. ISBN 0-394-58514-3.  ^ Baer, Robert (2003). See No Evil: The True Story of a Ground Soldier in the CIA's War on Terrorism. Three Rivers Press. ISBN 1-4000-4684-X.  ^ Wright, Peter; Greengrass, Paul (1987). Spycatcher. William Heinemann. ISBN 0-670-82055-5.  ^ McKinley, Cynthia A. S. "When the Enemy Has Our Eyes".  ^ Jones, Ishmael (January 2010). "Intelligence Reform is the President's Urgent Challenge". Washington Times.  ^ a b Neier, Aryeh; David J. Rothman (November 4, 2013). "Doctors Aided CIA Torture, Records Show". Open Societies Foundation. Retrieved December 11, 2013.  ^ Paramaguru, Kharunya (November 4, 2013). "CIA Made Doctors Complicit in Torture After 9/11, Report Says". TIME. Retrieved December 11, 2013.  ^ Siems, Larry (2012). The Torture Report: What the Documents Say About America's Post 9-11 Torture Program. New York: OR Books. p. 216.  ^ James S. Van Wagenen (April 4, 2007). "A Review of Congressional Oversight". CIA Center for the Study of Intelligence. Retrieved September 15, 2012.  ^ Saunders, Frances Stonor (1999). The Cultural Cold War: The CIA and the World of Arts and Letters. New Press. ISBN 1-56584-664-8.  ^ "Office of Transnational Issues".  ^ "CIA Crime and Narcotics Center".  ^ Gary Webb Dark Alliance ^ Solomon, Norman, (January/February 1997), "Snow Job" at the Wayback Machine (archived February 11, 2005). Extra! ^ "Panetta Tells Lawmakers CIA Misled Congress Post-2001 (Correct)". Bloomberg. July 9, 2009.  ^ BBC News, May 14, 2009, "Pelosi says CIA lied on 'torture'" News.bbc.co.uk ^ House Dems: Panetta testified CIA has misled Congress repeatedly ^ BBC News, July 9, 2009, "CIA 'often lied to congressmen'" News.bbc.co.uk ^ "Lawmaker: Panetta terminated secret program". MSNBC.com. July 10, 2009. Retrieved August 14, 2010.  ^ "US CODE: Title 50,413b. Presidential approval and reporting of covert actions". Law.cornell.edu. July 20, 2009. Retrieved March 16, 2010.  ^ https://web.archive.org/20090714224420/https://www.google.com:80/hostednews/ap/article/ALeqM5gQDNMgQrXYHlGWd9F3063DLFpiHAD99BMNVG2. Archived from the original on July 14, 2009. Retrieved July 8, 2009.  Missing or empty |title= (help) ^ [2][dead link] ^ Pincus, Walter (July 17, 2008). "House Passes Intelligence Authorization Bill". washingtonpost.com. Retrieved March 16, 2010.  ^ "Senators: CIA concealment may have broken law". USA Today. Associated Press. July 12, 2009. Retrieved August 19, 2011.  ^ Hess, Pamela (July 13, 2009). "Calls grow for probe of CIA plan for al-Qaida hits". Seattle Times. Retrieved August 19, 2011.  ^ "Cheney ordered intel withheld from Congress-senator". Reuters. July 12, 2009. Retrieved March 16, 2010.  ^ Gorman, Siobhan (July 15, 2009). "CIA Plan Envisioned Hit Teams Killing al Qaeda Leaders - WSJ.com". Online.wsj.com. Retrieved March 16, 2010.  ^ Siobhan Gorman (July 13, 2009). "CIA Had Secret Al Qaeda Plan". The Wall Street Journal. Retrieved August 6, 2009.  ^ Tabassum Zakaria (July 18, 2009). "House launches investigation into CIA program". Reuters. Retrieved March 16, 2010.  ^ "Holt Calls for Next Church Committee on CIA". The Washington Independent. July 29, 2009. Retrieved March 16, 2010.  ^ Mazzetti, Mark; Shane, Scott (July 18, 2009). "House Looks into Secrets Withheld From Congress". The New York Times. Retrieved April 28, 2010.  ^ Starr, Barbara (February 4, 2010). "Intelligence chief: U.S. can kill Americans abroad". CNN.  ^ "Intelligence Official Acknowledges Policy Allowing Targeted Killings of Americans". American Civil Liberties Union. February 4, 2010.  ^ "CIA director John Brennan apologizes for search of Senate committee's computers". Washington Post.  ^ "Anatomy of a Non-Denial Denial". The Intercept.  ^ "Statement on Intel Committee's CIA Detention, Interrogation Report". senate.gov.  ^ "It's About the Lying - The Intercept". The Intercept.  ^ Clancy, Tom (1984), The Hunt for Red October, HarperCollins, ISBN 0-87021-285-0  ^ Greene, Graham (2004), The Quiet American, Penguin Classics, ISBN 0-14-303902-4  References Agee, Philip (1975). Inside the Company: CIA Diary. Harmondsworth: Penguin. ISBN 0-140-04007-2.  Aldrich, Richard J. (2001). The Hidden Hand: Britain, America and Cold War Secret Intelligence. London: John Murray. ISBN 0-7195-5423-3. OCLC 46513534.  Andrew, Christopher (1996). For the President's Eyes Only. HarperCollins. ISBN 0-00-638071-9.  Baer, Robert (2003). Sleeping with the Devil: How Washington Sold Our Soul for Saudi Crude. Crown. ISBN 1-4000-5021-9.  Bearden, Milton; James Risen (2003). The Main Enemy: The Inside Story of the CIA's Final Showdown With the KGB. Random House. ISBN 0-679-46309-7.  Blum, William (2004). Killing Hope: U.S. Military and CIA Interventions Since World War II. Monroe, ME: Common Courage Press. ISBN 978-1-567-51252-6.  Immerman, Richard H. (1982). The CIA in Guatemala: The Foreign Policy of Intervention. University of Texas Press. ISBN 978-0-292-71083-2.  Dujmovic, Nicholas, "Drastic Actions Short of War: The Origins and Application of CIA's Covert Paramilitary Function in the Early Cold War," Journal of Military History, 76 (July 2012), 775–808 Johnson, Loch K. (1991). America's Secret Power: The CIA in a Democratic Society. Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-505490-3.  Jones, Ishmael (2010). The Human Factor: Inside the CIA's Dysfunctional Intelligence Culture. Encounter Books. ISBN 978-1-59403-223-3.  Jones, Milo; Silberzahn, Philippe (2013). Constructing Cassandra, Reframing Intelligence Failure at the CIA, 1947-2001. Stanford University Press. ISBN 978-0804793360.  Marchetti, Victor; John D. Marks (1974). The CIA and the Cult of Intelligence. Knopf. ISBN 0-394-48239-5.  McCoy, Alfred W. (1972). The Politics of Heroin in Southeast Asia. Harper Colophon. ISBN 978-0-06-090328-2.  McCoy, Alfred W. (2006). A Question of Torture: CIA Interrogation, from the Cold War to the War on Terror. New York: Owl Books (Henry Holt & Co.). ISBN 0-8050-8248-4. OCLC 78821099.  Kessler, Ronald (2003). The CIA at War: Inside the Secret Campaign Against Terror. St. Martin's Press. ISBN 0-312-31932-0.  Mahle, Melissa Boyle (2004). Denial and Deception: An Insider's View of the CIA from Iran-Contra to 9/11. Nation Books. ISBN 1-56025-649-4.  Prouty, L. Fletcher (Col. USAF, (Ret.)) (1973). The Secret Team: The CIA and Its Allies In Control of the World. Ballantine Books. ISBN 0-345-23776-5.  Ruth, Steven (2011). My Twenty Years as a CIA Officer: It's All About The Mission. Charleston, SC: CreateSpace. ISBN 978-1-4565-7170-2.  Sheymov, Victor (1993). Tower of Secrets. U.S. Naval Institute Press. ISBN 978-1-55750-764-8.  Smith, W. Thomas, Jr. (2003). Encyclopedia of the Central Intelligence Agency. Facts on File. ISBN 0-8160-4667-0.  Turner, Stansfield (2006). Burn Before Reading: Presidents, CIA Directors, and Secret Intelligence. Hyperion. ISBN 0-7868-8666-8.  Wallace, Robert; Melton, H. Keith; Schlesinger, Henry R. (2008). Spycraft: The Secret History of the CIA's Spytechs, from Communism to al-Qaeda. New York: Dutton. ISBN 0-525-94980-1. OCLC 182552888.  Weiner, Tim (2007). Legacy of Ashes: The History of the CIA. New York: Doubleday. ISBN 0-385-51445-X. OCLC 82367780.  External links Find more about Central Intelligence Agency at Wikipedia's sister projects Media from Commons News stories from Wikinews Source texts from Wikisource Official website CIA Freedom of Information Act Electronic Reading Room Landscapes of Secrecy: The CIA in History, Fiction and Memory (2011) Review of Legacy of Ashes: The History of CIA, CIA (June 26, 2008) Works by or about Central Intelligence Agency at Internet Archive Works by Central Intelligence Agency at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks) Central Intelligence Collection at Internet Archive v t e Central Intelligence Agency Geographic activities Americas Russia and Europe Africa Asia Transnational activities Terrorism Arms control, WMD, and proliferation Crime and illicit drug trade Health and economy Human rights Influence on public opinion Divisions Directorate of Science & Technology National Clandestine Service Special Activities Division National Resources Division Official reports by the U.S. Government on the CIA v t e Intelligence agencies and organizations of the United States Intelligence Community Department of Defense Defense Intelligence Agency (Defense Clandestine Service) National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency National Reconnaissance Office National Security Agency (Central Security Service) Armed Forces Army Military Intelligence Marine Corps Intelligence Activity Office of Naval Intelligence Twenty-Fifth Air Force Civilian Bureau of Intelligence and Research (State) Central Intelligence Agency (Directorate of Operations • Special Activities Division • Open Source Center) Drug Enforcement Administration (Justice) Federal Bureau of Investigation (Justice) Office of Intelligence and Analysis (Homeland Security) Coast Guard Intelligence (Homeland Security) Office of Terrorism and Financial Intelligence (Treasury) Office of Intelligence and Counterintelligence (Energy) Other Director of National Intelligence (National Counterterrorism Center • National Counterproliferation Center • Office of the National Counterintelligence Executive • National Intelligence Council • Intelligence Advanced Research Projects Activity) National Security Council President's Intelligence Advisory Board Under Secretary of Defense for Intelligence Intelligence Support Activity Defense Attaché System • National Intelligence University) Defunct Counterintelligence Field Activity Military Intelligence Service Office of Strategic Services Office of Special Plans Strategic Support Branch v t e National intelligence agencies Foreign intelligence agencies Afghanistan: NDS Albania: SHISH Algeria: DRS Argentina: SI Armenia: SNB Australia: ASIS Azerbaijan: MTN Bahrain: NSA Bangladesh: NSI Belarus: KGB RB Belgium: ADIV/SGRS Bosnia and Herzegovina: OSA-OBA Brazil: ABIN Brunei: BRD Cameroon: BMM Canada: CSIS Chad: ANS Chile: ANI China: MSS Croatia: SOA Cuba: DI Czech Republic: ÚZSI Denmark: FE Djibouti: BSRG Ecuador: SENAIN Egypt: GID Estonia: TA France: DGSE Gambia: NIA Georgia: GIS Germany: BND Ghana: BNI, BGU, RDU Greece: EYP Hungary: IH India: RAW Indonesia: BIN Iran: VAJA Iraq: GSD Ireland: G2 Israel: Mossad Italy: AISE Ivory Coast: NSC Japan: NPA CIRO Jordan: GID Kazakhstan: Syrbar Kenya: NIS Kyrgyzstan: SNB Kuwait: KSS Latvia: SAB Lithuania: VSD Lebanon: GDGS Libya: MJ Republic of Macedonia: UBK Malaysia: MEIO Maldives: NSS Mexico: CISEN Mongolia: GIA Montenegro: ANB Morocco: DGST Mozambique: SISE Netherlands: AIVD New Zealand: NAB Nigeria: NIA Norway: E-tjenesten Pakistan: ISI Papua New Guinea: NIO Philippines: NICA Poland: AW Portugal: SIED Qatar: QSS Romania: SIE Russia: SVR Saudi Arabia: GIP Serbia: BIA Sierra Leone: CISU Singapore: SID Slovakia: SIS Slovenia: SOVA Somalia: NISA South Africa: SSA South Korea: NIS Spain: CNI Sri Lanka: SIS Sudan: JAWM Sweden: KSI Switzerland: NDB Syria: GSD Taiwan: NSB Tajikistan: MoS Thailand: NIA Togo: NIA Tunisia: TIA Turkey: MİT Turkmenistan: KNB Uganda: ISO Ukraine: SZRU United Arab Emirates: UAEI United Kingdom: SIS (MI6) United States: CIA Uzbekistan: SNB Vietnam: TC2 Domestic intelligence agencies Argentina: SIDE Australia: ASIO Azerbaijan: MTN Bangladesh: SB Belarus: KGB RB Belgium: VS/SE Bosnia and Herzegovina: SIPA Brazil: ABIN Brunei: IRD Canada: CSIS Chile: ANI China: MSS Croatia: SOA Czech Republic: BIS Denmark: PET Egypt: Al Watani Estonia: KAPO Finland: SUPO France: DGSI Germany: BfV Ghana: GPS, CID Greece: EYP Hungary: AH India: IB, CBI, NSC, AIRMS Iran: VAJA, IRGC, PAVA Ireland: CSB, SDU, NSU Israel: Shin Bet Italy: AISI Kazakhstan: NSC Kenya: NIS Latvia: DP Lithuania: STT Republic of Macedonia: IA Malaysia: SB Japan: NPA PSIA Netherlands: NCTb New Zealand: NZSIS Nigeria: SSS Norway: PST Oman: ISS Pakistan: IB, FIA Philippines: NBI Poland: ABW Portugal: SIS Romania: SRI Russia: FSB Serbia: BIA Singapore: ISD South Africa: SSA South Korea: SPO Sri Lanka: SIS Sweden: SÄPO Switzerland: NDB Syria: GSD Taiwan: MJIB Thailand: ISOC, DSI Turkey: KDGM Ukraine: SBU United Kingdom: Security Service (MI5), NDEDIU, NCA, NBIS United States: FBI Uzbekistan: SNB Venezuela: SEBIN Vietnam: TC5 Zimbabwe CIO Military intelligence agencies Australia: DIO Bangladesh: DGFI Belgium: ADIV/SGRS Brazil: DIE Canada: Int Branch China: MID Croatia: VSOA Czech Republic: VZ Denmark: FE Egypt: DMISR Finland: FMIS France: DRM, DGSE Germany: MAD Ghana: MIU Hungary: KNBSZ Iran: IRGC India: DMI, DIA Indonesia: BAIS Ireland: G2 Israel: Aman Italy: CII Japan: MIC Kazakhstan: NSC Lithuania: AOTD Republic of Macedonia: MSSI Malaysia: DSID Morocco: DGED Netherlands: MIVD New Zealand: DDIS Norway: E-tjenesten Pakistan: MI, NI, AI Philippines: ISAFP Poland: SKW, SWW Portugal: CISMIL Romania: DGIA Russia: GRU Serbia: VOA, VBA Singapore: MIO Slovakia: VSS Slovenia: OVS South Africa: SANDF-ID South Korea: DSC Sri Lanka: DMI Sweden: MUST Switzerland: MND Syria: MI, AFID Taiwan: MND Thailand: AFSC Turkey: GENKUR İ.D.B., JİTEM Ukraine: HUR MO United Kingdom: DI United States: DIA Venezuela: DGCIM Vietnam: TC2 Signals intelligence agencies Australia: ASD Brazil: 2ª Sch/EMD Canada: CSE China: SIGINT Croatia: OTC Finland: FIRE France: DGSE Germany: BND Ghana: RDU India: JCB,NTRO Indonesia: LEMSANEG Ireland: CIS Israel: 8200 Japan: DIH Kazakhstan: NSC Netherlands: AIVD New Zealand: GCSB Pakistan: JSIB Philippines: PCG, IACAT Russia: Spetssvyaz South Africa: SSA Sweden: FRA Switzerland: NDB Syria: MI Turkey: MİT-ETİB, MİT-SİB Ukraine: Derzhspetszviazok United Kingdom: GCHQ United States: NSA Imagery intelligence agencies Australia: AGO New Zealand: GEOINT NZ Portugal: CIGeoE Russia: TsVTI GRU United Kingdom: DGIFC United States: NGA Related topics Espionage Global surveillance disclosures Chelsea Manning Snowden leaks WikiLeaks Great Firewall of China Mass surveillance in China Law enforcement Surveillance Big Brother Call detail record Carnivore Dishfire ECHELON PRISM Stone Ghost Turbulence (NSA programme) National security Surveillance issues in smart cities v t e Cold War USA USSR ANZUS NATO Non-Aligned Movement SEATO Warsaw Pact 1940s Hukbalahap Rebellion Dekemvriana Yalta Conference Operation Unthinkable Potsdam Conference Gouzenko Affair Operation Masterdom Operation Beleaguer Operation Blacklist Forty Iran crisis of 1946 Greek Civil War Corfu Channel incident Turkish Straits crisis Restatement of Policy on Germany First Indochina War Truman Doctrine Asian Relations Conference Marshall Plan 1948 Czechoslovak coup d'état Tito–Stalin Split Berlin Blockade Western betrayal Iron Curtain Eastern Bloc Western Bloc Chinese Civil War (Second round) Malayan Emergency 1950s Bamboo Curtain Korean War 1953 Iranian coup d'état Uprising of 1953 in East Germany 1954 Guatemalan coup d'état Partition of Vietnam First Taiwan Strait Crisis Geneva Summit (1955) Poznań 1956 protests Hungarian Revolution of 1956 Suez Crisis Syrian Crisis of 1957 Sputnik crisis Second Taiwan Strait Crisis Cuban Revolution Kitchen Debate Bandung Conference Bricker Amendment McCarthyism Operation Gladio Iraqi July Revolution "We will bury you" 1960s Congo Crisis Sino-Soviet split 1960 U-2 incident Bay of Pigs Invasion 1960 Turkish coup d'état Soviet–Albanian split Berlin Wall Portuguese Colonial War Angolan War of Independence Guinea-Bissau War of Independence Mozambican War of Independence Cuban Missile Crisis Sino-Indian War Sarawak Communist Insurgency Iraqi Ramadan Revolution 1963 Syrian coup d'état Vietnam War 1964 Brazilian coup d'état United States occupation of the Dominican Republic (1965–66) South African Border War Transition to the New Order Domino theory ASEAN Declaration Laotian Civil War 1966 Syrian coup d'état Argentine Revolution Korean DMZ Conflict Greek military junta of 1967–74 USS Pueblo incident Six-Day War War of Attrition Cultural Revolution Prague Spring Malaysia Communist Insurgency War Invasion of Czechoslovakia Iraqi Ba'athist Revolution Goulash Communism Sino-Soviet border conflict CPP-NPA-NDF rebellion Corrective Move 1970s Détente Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty Black September in Jordan Corrective Movement (Syria) Cambodian Civil War Realpolitik Ping-pong diplomacy 1971 Turkish military memorandum Corrective Revolution (Egypt) Four Power Agreement on Berlin Bangladesh Liberation War 1972 Nixon visit to China 1973 Chilean coup d'état Yom Kippur War Carnation Revolution Strategic Arms Limitation Talks Rhodesian Bush War Angolan Civil War Mozambican Civil War Ogaden War Ethiopian Civil War Lebanese Civil War Sino-Albanian split Cambodian–Vietnamese War Sino-Vietnamese War Iranian Revolution Operation Condor Dirty War Korean Air Lines Flight 902 Seven Days to the River Rhine Struggle against political abuse of psychiatry in the Soviet Union 1980s Soviet–Afghan War 1980 and 1984 Summer Olympics boycotts 1980 Turkish coup d'état 1986 Black Sea incident 1988 Black Sea bumping incident Solidarity Soviet reaction Contras Central American crisis RYAN Korean Air Lines Flight 007 Able Archer 83 Star Wars Invasion of Grenada People Power Revolution Nagorno-Karabakh War Tiananmen Square protests of 1989 Fall of the Berlin Wall Revolutions of 1989 Glasnost Perestroika 1990s Mongolian Revolution of 1990 Breakup of Yugoslavia Dissolution of the Soviet Union Dissolution of Czechoslovakia Frozen conflicts Abkhazia China Korea Nagorno-Karabakh South Ossetia Transnistria Sino-Indian border dispute Foreign policy Truman Doctrine Marshall Plan Containment Eisenhower Doctrine Domino theory Hallstein Doctrine Kennedy Doctrine Peaceful coexistence Ostpolitik Johnson Doctrine Brezhnev Doctrine Nixon Doctrine Ulbricht Doctrine Carter Doctrine Reagan Doctrine Rollback Sovereignty of Puerto Rico during the Cold War Ideologies Capitalism Chicago school Keynesianism Monetarism Neoclassical economics Reaganomics Supply-side economics Thatcherism Communism Marxism–Leninism Castroism Eurocommunism Guevarism Hoxhaism Juche Maoism Naxalism Stalinism Titoism Liberal democracy Social democracy Organizations ASEAN CIA Comecon EEC KGB Non-Aligned Movement SAARC Safari Club MI6 Stasi Propaganda Active measures Izvestia Pravda Crusade for Freedom Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty Red Scare TASS Voice of America Voice of Russia Races Arms race Nuclear arms race Space Race See also Brinkmanship NATO–Russia relations Soviet espionage in U.S. Russian espionage in U.S. American espionage in the Soviet Union Soviet Union–United States relations US–Soviet summits Category Portal Timeline List of conflicts v t e War on Terror War in Afghanistan • Iraq War • War in North-West Pakistan Participants Operational ISAF Operation Enduring Freedom participants Afghanistan Northern Alliance Iraq (Iraqi Armed Forces) NATO Pakistan United Kingdom United States European Union Philippines Ethiopia Targets al-Qaeda Osama bin Laden al-Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant al-Nusra Front Khorasan Abu Sayyaf Anwar al-Awlaki Al-Shabaab Hamas Harkat-ul-Jihad al-Islami Hezbollah Hizbul Mujahideen Islamic Courts Union Jaish-e-Mohammed Jemaah Islamiyah Lashkar-e-Taiba Taliban Islamic Movement of Uzbekistan Conflicts Operation Enduring Freedom War in Afghanistan OEF – Philippines Georgia Train and Equip Program Georgia Sustainment and Stability OEF – Horn of Africa OEF – Trans Sahara Drone strikes in Pakistan Other Insurgency in the Maghreb (2002–present) Insurgency in the North Caucasus Moro conflict in the Philippines Iraq War Iraqi insurgency Operation Linda Nchi Terrorism in Saudi Arabia War in North-West Pakistan War in Somalia (2006–09) 2007 Lebanon conflict al-Qaeda insurgency in Yemen Military intervention against ISIL Operation Inherent Resolve War in Afghanistan (2015–present) Operation Resolute Support See also Abu Ghraib torture and prisoner abuse Axis of evil Black sites Bush Doctrine Clash of Civilizations Combatant Status Review Tribunal Criticism of the War on Terror Death of Osama bin Laden Enhanced interrogation techniques Torture Memos Extrajudicial prisoners Extraordinary rendition Guantanamo Bay detention camp Military Commissions Act of 2006 Terrorist Surveillance Program Operation Noble Eagle Operation Eagle Assist Pakistan's role President's Surveillance Program Protect America Act of 2007 September 11 attacks Targeted killing Targeted Killing in International Law Targeted Killings: Law and Morality in an Asymmetrical World Unitary executive theory Unlawful combatant USA PATRIOT Act Withdrawal of U.S. troops from Afghanistan Terrorism portal War portal Authority control WorldCat Identities VIAF: 140094734 LCCN: n79099301 GND: 1021698-4 SUDOC: 027225496 BNF: cb118839832 (data) Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Central_Intelligence_Agency&oldid=717697618" Categories: Central Intelligence Agency 1947 establishments in the United States Government agencies established in 1947 McLean, Virginia United States intelligence agencies Cold War in popular culture Hidden categories: CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from December 2014 Articles with dead external links from August 2011 CS1 errors: dates Pages with citations lacking titles Pages with citations having bare URLs Articles with dead external links from March 2010 Wikipedia semi-protected pages Use American English from February 2014 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Use mdy dates from December 2014 Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2013 All articles containing potentially dated statements All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from June 2012 Articles that may be too long from April 2015 Articles using small message boxes Wikipedia articles needing clarification from June 2015 Articles with unsourced statements from October 2015 Articles with unsourced statements from March 2016 Articles with unsourced statements from December 2014 Articles with unsourced statements from April 2009 Wikipedia articles with VIAF identifiers Wikipedia articles with LCCN identifiers Wikipedia articles with GND identifiers Wikipedia articles with BNF identifiers Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Article Talk Variants Views Read View source View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Featured content Current events Random article Donate to Wikipedia Wikipedia store Interaction Help About Wikipedia Community portal Recent changes Contact page Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Cite this page Print/export Create a book Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikinews Wikiquote Wikisource Languages Afrikaans العربية Armãneashti Asturianu Azərbaycanca বাংলা Bân-lâm-gú Башҡортса Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца)‎ Български Bosanski Brezhoneg Català Чӑвашла Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Frysk Gaeilge Galego ગુજરાતી 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית Basa Jawa ಕನ್ನಡ ქართული Қазақша Kurdî Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Magyar Македонски മലയാളം मराठी Bahasa Melayu Монгол မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands 日本語 Napulitano Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Oʻzbekcha/ўзбекча پنجابی Polski Português Română Русский Scots Shqip Sicilianu Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Ślůnski کوردیی ناوەندی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Basa Sunda Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் Татарча/tatarça తెలుగు ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt 文言 ייִדיש Yorùbá 粵語 中文 Edit links This page was last modified on 29 April 2016, at 06:07. Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view