Real Canadian Superstore - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Real Canadian Superstore From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to: navigation, search This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (April 2014) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) Real Canadian Superstore Type Supermarket Industry Retail Founded March 1979 Products Bakery, beer (select locations), charcuterie, clothing, dairy, deli, frozen foods, gardening centre, gasoline (select locations), general grocery, general merchandise, liquor, meat & poultry, pharmacy, photolab, produce, seafood, snacks, wine Parent Loblaw Companies Slogan Big on Fresh, Low on Price. Website http://www.superstore.ca/ Real Canadian Superstore is a chain of hypermarkets owned by Canadian food retailing giant Loblaw Companies. Its name is often shortened to RCSS or Superstore. Originating in Western Canada in the late 1970s/early 1980s, the banner expanded into Ontario in the early 2000s as Loblaw attempts to fend off competition from department stores including U.S.-based Wal-Mart. Loblaw has tested alternative banners at some locations in Ontario, with some labelled as "Loblaw Superstore", and a few others as simply "Superstore"; for a time this was reflected in the chain's marketing which used a separate logo to advertise all of these banners. The company has since reverted to marketing the entire chain as Real Canadian Superstore, although some locations might retain other signage. Contents 1 Overview 2 History 3 Relationship with other Loblaw banners 4 Locations 4.1 Alberta 4.2 British Columbia 4.3 Manitoba 4.4 Ontario 4.5 Saskatchewan 4.6 Yukon 5 See also 6 External links 7 References Overview[edit] Logo used until 2005 Logo previously used in advertising in Ontario; generic type for both Loblaw Superstore and Real Canadian Superstore The stores carry a variety of goods, but the vast majority of space is devoted to groceries and about a third of each store is set aside for electronics, housewares, and clothing. Items in the latter two categories are mainly from Loblaw's private labels, such as President's Choice, Life at Home, or Joe Fresh. As with many Loblaw stores, they offer corporate-branded services such as PhotoLab photo finishing and DrugStore pharmacies. Many outlets also boast a GoodLife Fitness club, drive-through pharmacies, gas bars, photo studios, community rooms, as well as walk-in medical clinics managed by Primacy Medical. Loblaws is working to cut costs and compete effectively with this multi-format store. Each store has a similar layout, useful for both cost efficiency and shopper ease. Also, in an effort to cater to individual customer segments, Superstore buys specific products for different regions. Superstore locations now top 20,000 square metres (220,000 sq ft). In the west, Superstores are operated by Loblaw subsidiary Westfair Foods Ltd. Ontario stores are operated as part of Loblaw's other banners, including Loblaws and Zehrs, although Superstore is considered a separate chain, and prices at one chain may not apply at the other. Loblaw is centralizing its head office operations, which includes the relocation of the General Merchandise personnel from Calgary, Alberta to Brampton, Ontario to consolidate operations. In Alberta, where private liquor retailing is permitted, a chain of 30 Real Canadian Liquorstores operate, mostly near Real Canadian Superstores in that province. Employees of Loblaws and the Real Canadian Superstore are members of the United Food and Commercial Workers (UFCW) union. History[edit] The first Real Canadian Superstore location opened in March 1979 in a former Loblaws location in Saskatoon, Saskatchewan under the name SuperValu. Numerous other SuperValu locations opened across Western Canada before most gradually expanded into Superstore sites; the SuperValu name is still in use in British Columbia and the Maritimes, the latter branded as Atlantic SuperValu. The similarly named The Real Superstore was used in the United States from the 1970s up until the mid-1990s by the Loblaws-owned National Supermarkets chain until the chain was purchased by competitor Schnucks. Superstore marks the return of Loblaw's superstore format in the Greater Toronto Area after the unsuccessful launch of the SuperCentre format in the 1980s and 1990s. In the early 21st century, Loblaw brought the Superstore banner to Ontario as a response to the introduction of large grocery sections in most Canadian Wal-Mart stores and other department stores, and as a pre-emptive strike against any plans by Wal-Mart to bring its "Supercenter" format to Canada. Originally, Ontario stores were co-branded with the local Loblaw banner (i.e., "Loblaws - The Real Canadian Superstore"), but most shortened their name to reduce confusion and allow separate weekly specials for each chain. In 2003, Loblaws purchased Maple Leaf Gardens, the former home of the Toronto Maple Leafs, and announced plans to convert it into a Real Canadian Superstore, which was criticised by historical groups such as Friends of Maple Leaf Gardens. Loblaws later completed an agreement with Ryerson University to convert a large part of the gardens into Ryerson University's athletic centre, which has a NHL regulation ice rink on the top floor under the roof for use by the university's hockey team and other facilities. Loblaws opened up its half of the building under the Loblaws name on November 30, 2011, making it the company's new flagship store. The store has many tributes to the Gardens' past, displays about the arena, and a dot on the floor of the store marking original centre ice. The exterior of Maple Leaf Gardens remained unchanged; however, during the Ryerson part of the project the canopy and sign were replaced by a new canopy and sign based on the original 1940s version of the canopy and sign. The replacement has received much acclaim due to its historical accuracy to the original sign.[citation needed] New Ontario locations began to open under the name Loblaw Superstore in late 2007. Since December 2008, Ontario stores have used common flyers displaying a combined "Superstore: Loblaw / Real Canadian" logo.[1] However, Loblaw has not yet said whether one banner will eventually replace the other. In March 2009, the Real Canadian Superstore in Oakville became the Loblaw Superstore with new signage and colour scheme, along with the Weston location in Summer 2009. In fall 2009, the Weston location had again reverted to Real Canadian Superstore banner. Later in late 2012, the Weston location opened its "Gas Bar".[importance?] Relationship with other Loblaw banners[edit] There are no Superstore locations as such in Atlantic Canada or Quebec. However, in recent years, and particularly since 2008, Atlantic Superstore in the Maritimes and Dominion in Newfoundland and Labrador, both also owned by Loblaw, have adopted similar store formats and a similar marketing approach to RCSS. In Quebec, Maxi and Co. and some larger Loblaws locations fill the void. It is not clear whether Loblaw intends to eventually rebrand these stores to create a national "Superstore" chain. As well, there are a handful of large-format Loblaws and Zehrs stores in Ontario – including certain locations in Markham, Ottawa, and Kitchener – which closely replicate the selection of food and general merchandise available at Superstores. Most of these locations were built around the same time as the first Ontario Superstores, but nevertheless chose to use older brand names. Locations[edit] The Real Canadian Superstore adjacent to Southland Park in Calgary, Alberta before renovations in July 2006 Edmonton, Alberta, Inside the Clareview Superstore in August 2006 Real Canadian Superstore in Grimsby, Ontario, December 2006 Inside the Grimsby store, January 2006 Inside the Grimsby store, April 2008 As of 2015, the Superstore website lists 113 locations.[2] Alberta[edit] 29 locations: Airdrie Calgary (10) Camrose Edmonton (8) Fort McMurray Grande Prairie Lethbridge Lloydminster Medicine Hat Red Deer Sherwood Park Spruce Grove St. Albert British Columbia[edit] 27 locations: Abbotsford Burnaby Campbell River Chilliwack Coquitlam (2) Courtenay Cranbrook Delta Duncan Kamloops Kelowna Langley Mission Nanaimo North Vancouver Penticton Pitt Meadows Prince George Richmond Surrey (2) Vancouver (2) Vernon Victoria Westbank Manitoba[edit] 11 locations: Brandon Steinbach Winkler Winnipeg (8) Ontario[edit] 38 locations: Ajax Aurora Brampton Brockville Chatham Georgetown Grimsby Kitchener Leamington London (2) Midland Milton Mississauga (2) Newmarket Oakville Oshawa (2) Ottawa (3) Peterborough Sarnia Scarborough Simcoe St. Catharines St. Thomas Strathroy Sudbury Thunder Bay Toronto (3) Wasaga Beach Whitby Windsor (2) Saskatchewan[edit] 7 locations: Moose Jaw Prince Albert Regina (2) Saskatoon (2) Yorkton Yukon[edit] 1 location: Whitehorse See also[edit] Real Canadian Wholesale Club Real Canadian Liquorstore Loblaw Companies Extra Foods Supermarkets in Canada External links[edit] Real Canadian Superstore official website United Food and Commercial Workers (UFCW) Union References[edit] ^ Superstore Ontario website, accessed December 8, 2008 ^ Store locator at official website v t e George Weston Limited Corporate Directors A. Charles Baillie Robert Dart Peter Eby Phillip Farmer Anne Fraser R. Donald Fullerton Anthony Graham Mark Hoffman Allan Leighton John Makinson Robert Prichard Wendy Rebanks Galen Weston Galen Weston Jr. President's Choice brands President's Choice President's Choice Financial PC Points Food or drink brands Arnie's Bagels Brownberry Country Harvest Exact George Weston Bakeries (Canada only) Interbake Foods No Name Wonder Bread (Canada only)* Loblaw Companies stores Atlantic Cash & Carry Atlantic Superstore Dominion Extra Foods Fortinos Freshmart Loblaws Maxi No Frills Provigo Real Canadian Superstore SaveEasy Shoppers Drug Mart SuperValu T & T Supermarket Valu-mart Wholesale Club Your Independent Grocer Zehrs Markets *Rights to these brands in the United States are owned by different companies. v t e Supermarket chains in Canada Overwaitea Food Group Overwaitea Foods PriceSmart Foods Save-On-Foods Urban Fare Loblaw Companies Atlantic Superstore Dominion Extra Foods Fortinos Freshmart Loblaws Maxi No Frills Provigo Real Canadian Superstore SaveEasy SuperValu T&T Valu-mart Wholesale Club Your Independent Grocer Zehrs Metro Inc. Food Basics Metro Super C Marché Adonis Sobeys Foodland FreshCo IGA (except in British Columbia) Price Chopper Safeway Sobeys Thrifty Foods Other national chains Costco Walmart Regional chains Calgary Co-op (Alberta: Calgary area) Choices Market (BC: Vancouver, Kelowna) Co-op Atlantic (Maritimes, Quebec) Farm Boy (Ontario: Ottawa area, Kingston) Fairway Markets (Victoria area) Foodex (Newfoundland and Labrador) Galati Market Fresh (Ontario: Toronto) H Mart (Greater Vancouver, Greater Toronto Area) IGA (in British Columbia) Longo's (Ontario: Greater Toronto Area) Marché Frais (Quebec, Ottawa) Northern/Northmart (Northern Canada) Saskatoon Co-op (Saskatchewan: Saskatoon area) SPUD (BC, Alberta) Whole Foods Market (Greater Vancouver, Ontario) Defunct banners A&P Ayre's Supermarkets Commisso's Food Markets Dominion Food City Galati Brothers Héritage Knob Hill Farms Loeb Miracle Food Mart Sav-A-Centre Steinberg's Super Centre Target Ultra Food & Drug Village Food Stores Zellers (2 stores still remain in Ontario) List of supermarket chains in Canada Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Real_Canadian_Superstore&oldid=718838932" Categories: Loblaw Companies Supermarkets of Canada Hypermarkets Hidden categories: Articles needing additional references from April 2014 All articles needing additional references All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from August 2012 Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Article Talk Variants Views Read Edit View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Featured content Current events Random article Donate to Wikipedia Wikipedia store Interaction Help About Wikipedia Community portal Recent changes Contact page Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Cite this page Print/export Create a book Download as PDF Printable version Languages Polski Edit links This page was last modified on 5 May 2016, at 22:49. Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view