Saint Catherine's Monastery - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Saint Catherine's Monastery From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia   (Redirected from St. Catherine's Monastery) Jump to: navigation, search Saint Catherine's Monastery Monastery information Order Church of Sinai Established 565 People Founder(s) Justinian I Site Location Saint Catherine, Egypt in the South Sinai Governorate Country  Egypt Coordinates 28°33′20″N 33°58′34″E﻿ / ﻿28.55556°N 33.97611°E﻿ / 28.55556; 33.97611Coordinates: 28°33′20″N 33°58′34″E﻿ / ﻿28.55556°N 33.97611°E﻿ / 28.55556; 33.97611 Website www.sinaimonastery.com UNESCO World Heritage Site Official name Saint Catherine Area Type Cultural Criteria i, iii, iv, vi Designated 2002 (26th session) Reference no. 954 State Party Egypt Region Arab States Saint Catherine's Monastery (Modern Greek: Μονὴ τῆς Ἁγίας Αἰκατερίνης, Arabic: دير القدّيسة كاترين‎), officially "Sacred Monastery of the God-Trodden Mount Sinai" (Modern Greek: Ιερά Μονή του Θεοβαδίστου Όρους Σινά), lies on the Sinai Peninsula, at the mouth of a gorge at the foot of Mount Sinai, in the city of Saint Catherine, Egypt in the South Sinai Governorate. The monastery is controlled by the autocephalous Church of Sinai, part of the wider Eastern Orthodox Church, and is a UNESCO World Heritage Site. Built between 548 and 565, the monastery is one of the oldest working Christian monasteries in the world.[1][2] The site contains the world's oldest continually operating library, possessing many unique books including the Syriac Sinaiticus and, until 1859, the Codex Sinaiticus.[3][4] A small town with hotels and swimming pools, called Saint Katherine City, has grown around the monastery. Contents 1 Christian traditions 2 History 3 Manuscripts and icons 4 Works of art 5 Icons 6 See also 7 References 8 Further reading 9 External links Christian traditions[edit] According to tradition, Catherine of Alexandria was a Christian martyr sentenced to death on the wheel. When this failed to kill her, she was beheaded. According to tradition, angels took her remains to Mount Sinai. Around the year 800, monks from the Sinai Monastery found her remains. Although it is commonly known as Saint Catherine's, the monastery's full official name is the Sacred Monastery of the God-Trodden Mount Sinai. The patronal feast of the monastery is the Transfiguration. The monastery has become a favorite site of pilgrimage. History[edit] Bell tower at Saint Catherine's Monastery Saint Catherine's Monastery, 1968 Saint Catherine's monastery, 1852 The oldest record of monastic life at Sinai comes from the travel journal written in Latin by a woman named Egeria about 381-384. She visited many places around the Holy Land and Mount Sinai, where, according to the Hebrew Bible, Moses received the Ten Commandments from God.[5] The monastery was built by order of Emperor Justinian I (reigned 527-565), enclosing the Chapel of the Burning Bush (also known as "Saint Helen's Chapel") ordered to be built by Empress Consort Helena, mother of Constantine the Great, at the site where Moses is supposed to have seen the burning bush. The living bush on the grounds is purportedly the one seen by Moses. Structurally the monastery's king post truss is the oldest known surviving roof truss in the world.[6] The site is sacred to Christianity, Islam and Judaism.[7] A mosque was created by converting an existing chapel during the Fatimid Caliphate (909-1171), which was in regular use until the era of the Mamluk Sultanate in the 13th century and is still in use today on special occasions. During the Ottoman Empire, the mosque was in desolate condition; it was restored in the early 20th century.[8] During the seventh century, the isolated Christian anchorites of the Sinai were eliminated: only the fortified monastery remained. The monastery is still surrounded by the massive fortifications that have preserved it. Until the twentieth century, access was through a door high in the outer walls. From the time of the First Crusade, the presence of Crusaders in the Sinai until 1270 spurred the interest of European Christians and increased the number of intrepid pilgrims who visited the monastery. The monastery was supported by its dependencies in Egypt, Palestine, Syria, Crete, Cyprus and Constantinople. Ossuary in Saint Catherine's Monastery The monastery, along with several dependencies in the area, constitute the entire Church of Sinai, which is headed by an archbishop, who is also the abbot of the monastery. The exact administrative status of the church within the Eastern Orthodox Church is ambiguous: by some, including the church itself,[9] it is considered autocephalous,[10][11] by others an autonomous church under the jurisdiction of the Greek Orthodox Church of Jerusalem.[12] The archbishop is traditionally consecrated by the Greek Orthodox Patriarch of Jerusalem; in recent centuries he has usually resided in Cairo. During the period of the Crusades which was marked by bitterness between the Orthodox and Catholic churches, the monastery was patronized by both the Byzantine emperors and the rulers of the Kingdom of Jerusalem, and their respective courts. Manuscripts and icons[edit] Ashtiname of Muhammad 6th-century hot wax icon The monastery library preserves the second largest collection of early codices and manuscripts in the world, outnumbered only by the Vatican Library. It contains Greek, Arabic, Armenian, Coptic, Hebrew, Georgian, and Aramaic texts. In May 1844 and February 1859, Constantin von Tischendorf visited the monastery for research and discovered the Codex Sinaiticus, dating from the 4th Century, at the time the oldest almost completely preserved manuscript of the Bible. The finding from 1859 left the monastery in the 19th century for Russia, in circumstances that had been long disputed. But in 2003 Russian scholars discovered the donation act for the manuscript signed by the Council of Cairo Metochion and Archbishop Callistratus on 13 November 1869. The monastery received 9000 rubles as a gift from Tsar Alexander II of Russia.[13] The Codex was sold by Stalin in 1933 to the British Museum and is now in the British Library, London, where it is on public display. Prior to September 1, 2009, a previously unseen fragment of Codex Sinaiticus was discovered in the monastery's library.[14][15] In February 1892, Agnes Smith Lewis identified a palimpsest in St Catherine's library that became known as the Syriac Sinaiticus and is still in the Monastery's possession. Agnes and her sister Margaret Dunlop Gibson returned with a team of scholars that included J. Rendel Harris, to photograph and transcribe the work in its entirety.[16] As the manuscript predates the Codex Sinaiticus, it became crucial in understanding the history of the New Testament. External video The Icons of Saint Catherine's Monastery, Sinai, Egypt, J. Paul Getty Museum The Monastery also has a copy of the Ashtiname of Muhammad, in which the Islamic prophet Muhammad is claimed to have bestowed his protection upon the monastery.[17] The most important manuscripts have since been filmed or digitized, and so are accessible to scholars. A team of imaging scientists and scholars from the USA and Europe is using spectral imaging techniques developed for imaging the Archimedes Palimpsest to study more than one hundred palimpsests in the monastery library.[18] The library will be extensively renovated for some time.[19] Works of art[edit] The complex houses irreplaceable works of art: mosaics, the best collection of early icons in the world, many in encaustic, as well as liturgical objects, chalices and reliquaries, and church buildings. The large icon collection begins with a few dating to the 5th (possibly) and 6th centuries, which are unique survivals, the monastery having been untouched by Byzantine iconoclasm, and never sacked. The oldest icon on an Old Testament theme is also preserved there. A project to catalogue the collections has been ongoing since the 1960s. The monastery was an important centre for the development of the hybrid style of Crusader art, and still retains over 120 icons created in the style, by far the largest collection in existence. Many were evidently created by Latins, probably monks, based in or around the monastery in the 13th century.[20] Icons[edit] Icon of the enthroned Virgin and Child with saints and angels, 6th century The oldest known icon of Christ Pantocrator, encaustic on panel Crucifixion, 13th century Holy doors Madonna and Child, 13th century 13th century Byzantine icon of Saint Michael the Archangel Transfiguration, 12th century Ladder of Divine Ascent Emperor John VIII Palaiologos Icon of Saint Catherine of Alexandria A panorama of St Catherine's See also[edit] Archbishop of Mount Sinai and Raithu Charnel House Eastern Christianity Gregory of Sinai Ladder of Divine Ascent Oldest churches in the world Poustinia Syriac Sinaiticus Kurt Weitzmann Catherine of Alexandria Agnes and Margaret Smith References[edit] ^ Din, Mursi Saad El et al.. Sinai: the site & the history : essays. New York: New York University Press, 1998. 80. ISBN 0814722032 ^ "Saint Catherine Area". UNESCO.  ^ Schrope, Mark (1 June 2015). "Medicine’s Hidden Roots in an Ancient Manuscript". NY Times. Retrieved 1 June 2015.  ^ Jules Leroy; Peter Collin (2004). Monks and Monasteries of the Near East. Gorgias Press LLC. pp. 93–94. ISBN 978-1-59333-276-1.  ^ Pilgrimage of Etheria text at ccel.org ^ Feilden, Bernard M.. Conservation of historic buildings. 3rd ed. Oxford: Architectural Press, 2003. 51. ISBN 0750658630 ^ "The Monastery". St-Katherine-net. Retrieved 23 October 2014.  ^ "Saint Catherine Area".  ^ The official Website describes the Church as "διοικητικά "αδούλωτος, ασύδοτος, ακαταπάτητος, πάντη και παντός ελευθέρα, αυτοκέφαλος" or "administratively 'free, loose, untresspassable, free from anyone at any time, autocephalous'" (see link below) ^ Weitzmann, Kurt, in: Galey, John; Sinai and the Monastery of St. Catherine, p. 14, Doubleday, New York (1980) ISBN 0-385-17110-2 ^ Ware, Kallistos (Timothy) (1964). "Part I: History". The Orthodox Church. Penguin Books. Retrieved 2007-07-14.  Under Introduction Bishop Kallistos says that Sinai is "autocephalous"; under The twentieth century, Greeks and Arabs he states that "There is some disagreement about whether the monastery should be termed an 'autocephalous' or merely an 'autonomous' Church." ^ The Orthodox Church of Mount Sinai CNEWA Canada, "A papal agency for humanitarian and pastoral support" Archived May 30, 2010, at the Wayback Machine. ^ The History of the acquisition of the Sinai Bible by the Russian Government in the context of recent findings in Russian archives (english Internetedition). The article from A.V. Zakharova was first published in Montfaucon. Études de paléographie, de codicologie et de diplomatique, Moscow-St.Petersburg, 2007, pp. 209-266) see also Alexander Schick, Tischendorf und die älteste Bibel der Welt. Die Entdeckung des Codex Sinaiticus im Katharinenkloster (Tischendorf and the oldest Bible in the world - The discovery of the Codex Sinaiticus in St. Catherine's Monastery), Muldenhammer 2015, p. 123-128 and p. 145-155. ^ "Fragment from world's oldest Bible found hidden in Egyptian monastery". The Independent, 2 Sept, 2009. ^ "Oldest known Bible to go online". BBC News, 3 August 2005. ^ Soskice, Janet (2009). The Sisters of Sinai: How two lady adventurers discovered the hidden gospels. London: Vintage. pp. Chapter 14. ISBN 978-1-4000-3474-1.  ^ Brandie Ratliff, "The monastery of Saint Catherine at Mount Sinai and the Christian communities of the Caliphate." Sinaiticus. The bulletin of the Saint Catherine Foundation (2008). ^ Schrope, Mark (Sep 6, 2012). "In the Sinai, a global team is revolutionizing the preservation of ancient manuscripts". Washington Post Magazine. Retrieved 2012-09-07.  ^ Blog from Father Justin published on the website of The Saint Catherine Foundation. ^ Kurt Weitzmann in The Icon, Evans Brothers Ltd, London (1982), pp. 201-207 (trans. of Le Icone, Montadori 1981), ISBN 0-237-45645-1 Further reading[edit] Böttrich, Christfried (2011). Der Jahrhundertfund. Entdeckung und Geschichte des Codex Sinaiticus (The Discovery of the Century. Discovery and history of Codex Sinaiticus). Leipzig: Evangelische Verlagsanstalt. ISBN 978-3-374-02586-2.  Forsyth, G. H.; Weitzmann, K. (1973). The Monastery of Saint Catherine at Mount Sinai - The Church and Fortress of Justinian: Plates. Princeton: Princeton University Press. ISBN 0-472-33000-4.  Porter, Stanley E. (2015). Constantine Tischendorf. The Life and Work of a 19th Century Bible Hunter. London: Bloomsbury T&T Clark. ISBN 978-0-5676-5803-6.  Schick, Alexander (2015). Tischendorf und die älteste Bibel der Welt - Die Entdeckung des CODEX SINAITICUS im Katharinenkloster (Tischendorf and the oldest Bible in the world - The discovery of the Codex Sinaiticus in St. Catherine's Monastery - Biography cause of the anniversary of the 200th birthday of Tischendorf with many unpublished documents from his estate. These provide insight into previously unknown details of the discoveries and the reasons behind the donation of the manuscript. Recent research on Tischendorf and the Codex Sinaiticus and its significance for New Testament Textual Research). Muldenhammer: Jota. ISBN 978-3-935707-83-1.  Soskice, Janet (1991). Sisters of Sinai: How Two Lady Adventurers Found the Hidden Gospels. London: Vintage. ISBN 978-1-4000-3474-1.  Sotiriou, G. and M. (1956-8). Icones du Mont Sinaï. 2 vols (plates and texts). Collection de L'Institut francais d'Athènes 100 and 102. Athens.  Check date values in: |date= (help) Weitzmann, K. (1976). The Monastery of Saint Catherine at Mihnt Sinai: The Icons, Volume I: From the Sixth to the Tenth Century. Princeton: Princeton University Press.  Weitzmann, K.; Galavaris, G. (1991). The Monastery of Saint Catherine at Mount Sinai. The Illuminated Greek Manuscripts, Volume I. From the Ninth to the Twelfth Century. Princeton: Princeton University Press. ISBN 0-691-03602-0.  External links[edit] This article's use of external links may not follow Wikipedia's policies or guidelines. Please improve this article by removing excessive or inappropriate external links, and converting useful links where appropriate into footnote references. (February 2015) Wikimedia Commons has media related to Saint Catherine's Monastery, Mount Sinai. Saint Catherine Area World Heritage Listing on UNESCO's Website Official Website of the Holy Monastery of St. Catherine at Mount Sinai Chapel of St. Helen St. Catherine's Monastery, Sinai, Egypt Camberwell/St.Catherine's Project St Catherine Project (digitisation) video Holy Image, Hallowed Ground: Icons from Sinai Getty exhibit Early Icons from Sinai, Belmont U St. Catherine's Monastery (Sinai) (OrthodoxWiki article) The text of the Charter from Muhammad can be read here or here. At a Mountain Monastery, Old Texts Gain Digital Life article from New York Times Information about the town of St. Catherine  Herbermann, Charles, ed. (1913). "Monastery of St. Catherine". Catholic Encyclopedia. New York: Robert Appleton Company.  Prophet Muhammad's Letter to Monks of St. Catharine Monastery More on Saint Catherine's Monastery and Mount Sinai Caucasian Albanian Alphabet: Ancient Script Discovered in the Ashes [St. Catherine's], Azerbaijan International, Vol. 11:3 (Autumn 2003), pp. 38–41. Article on the Orthodox Church of Mount Sinai by Ronald Roberson on the CNEWA web site The Albanian Script: The Process - How Its Secrets Were Revealed [St. Catherine's], Azerbaijan International, Vol. 11:3 (Autumn 2003), pp. 44–51. v t e Monasteries in Egypt Upper Egypt: Deir el-Muharraq Monastery of the Martyrs Red Monastery White Monastery Monastery of Saint Epiphanius Monastery of Saint Matthew the Potter Monastery of Saint Fana Middle Egypt: Monastery of Saint Parsoma Lower Egypt: Monastery of Saint Mina Eastern Desert: Monastery of Saint Anthony Monastery of Saint Paul the Anchorite Scetes: Paromeos Monastery Monastery of Saint Macarius the Great Monastery of Saint Pishoy Syrian Monastery Sinai: Monastery of Saint Catherine Category Christianity in Egypt Monasteries by country v t e World Heritage Sites in Egypt Abu Mena Islamic Cairo Memphis and its Necropolis – the Pyramid Fields from Giza to Dahshur Nubian Monuments from Abu Simbel to Philae Saint Catherine Area Ancient Thebes with its Necropolis Wadi Al-Hitan (Whale Valley) v t e Byzantine Empire topics   History Preceding Roman Empire Dominate (330–717) Early Constantinian dynasty Valentinian dynasty Theodosian dynasty Leonid dynasty Justinian dynasty Heraclian dynasty Twenty Years' Anarchy (717–1204) Middle Isaurian dynasty Nikephorian dynasty Amorian dynasty Macedonian dynasty Doukas dynasty Komnenos dynasty Angelos dynasty (1204–1453) Late Fourth Crusade Latin Empire / Nicaea / Epirus / Trebizond / others Palaiologos dynasty Fall of Constantinople   Governance Central Emperors Basileus Autokrator Senate Imperial bureaucracy Eparch Early Praetorian prefects Magister officiorum Comes sacrarum largitionum Comes rerum privatarum Quaestor sacri palatii Middle Logothetes tou dromou Sakellarios Logothetes tou genikou Logothetes tou stratiotikou Chartoularios tou sakelliou Chartoularios tou vestiariou Epi tou eidikou Protasekretis Epi ton deeseon Late Megas logothetes Mesazon Provincial Early Praetorian prefectures Dioceses Provinces Quaestura exercitus Exarchate of Ravenna Exarchate of Africa Middle Themata Kleisourai Bandon Catepanates Late Kephale Despotates Diplomacy Treaties Diplomats   Military Army Battle tactics Military manuals Wars Battles Revolts Siege warfare Generals Mercenaries Early Late Roman army East Roman army Foederati Bucellarii Scholae Palatinae Excubitors Middle Themata Kleisourai Tourma Droungos Bandon Tagmata Domestic of the Schools Hetaireia Akritai Varangian Guard Late Komnenian army Pronoia Vestiaritai Palaiologan army Allagion Paramonai Grand Domestic Navy Karabisianoi Maritime themata Cibyrrhaeot Aegean Sea Samos Dromon Greek fire Droungarios of the Fleet Megas doux Admirals Naval battles   Religion and law Religion Eastern Orthodox Church Byzantine Rite Ecumenical councils Saints Patriarchate of Constantinople Arianism Monophysitism Paulicianism Iconoclasm Great Schism Bogomilism Hesychasm Mount Athos Missionary activity Bulgaria Moravia Serbs Kievan Rus' Jews Muslims Law Codex Theodosianus Corpus Juris Civilis Ecloga Basilika Hexabiblos Mutilation   Culture and society Architecture Secular Sacred Cross-in-square Domes Constantinople Great Palace of Constantinople Blachernae Palace Hagia Sophia Hagia Irene Chora Church Pammakaristos Church City Walls Thessalonica Arch of Galerius and Rotunda Hagios Demetrios Hagia Sophia Panagia Chalkeon Ravenna San Vitale Sant'Apollinare in Classe Sant'Apollinare Nuovo Other locations Daphni Monastery Hosios Loukas Nea Moni of Chios Saint Catherine's Monastery Mystras Art Icons Enamel Mosaics Painters Macedonian period art Komnenian renaissance Economy Agriculture Coinage Mints Trade silk Silk Road Varangians Dynatoi Literature Novel Acritic songs Digenes Akritas Alexander romance Historians Everyday life Calendar Cuisine Dance Dress Flags and insignia Hippodrome Music Octoechos People Byzantine Greeks Slavery Units of measurement Science Learning Encyclopedias Inventions Medicine Philosophy Neoplatonism Scholars Renaissance University   Impact Byzantine commonwealth Byzantine studies Museums Byzantinism Cyrillic script Neo-Byzantine architecture Third Rome Megali Idea Byzantine Empire portal Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Saint_Catherine%27s_Monastery&oldid=714721926" Categories: World Heritage Sites in Egypt 565 Saint Catherine's Monastery 6th-century religious buildings Archives in Egypt Byzantine sacred architecture Hesychasm Christian monasteries established in the 6th century Buildings and structures in South Sinai Governorate Eastern Orthodox church buildings Hidden categories: Coordinates on Wikidata Articles which use infobox templates with no data rows Articles containing Greek-language text Articles containing Arabic-language text CS1 errors: dates Wikipedia external links cleanup from February 2015 Wikipedia spam cleanup from February 2015 Commons category with local link same as on Wikidata Articles incorporating a citation from the 1913 Catholic Encyclopedia with Wikisource reference Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Article Talk Variants Views Read Edit View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Featured content Current events Random article Donate to Wikipedia Wikipedia store Interaction Help About Wikipedia Community portal Recent changes Contact page Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Cite this page Print/export Create a book Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Languages العربية Arpetan Azərbaycanca Беларуская Български Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ქართული Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Magyar മലയാളം მარგალური مصرى Bahasa Melayu Nederlands नेपाली 日本語 Norsk bokmål Occitan Polski Português Русский Simple English Slovenčina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt Winaray 中文 Edit links This page was last modified on 11 April 2016, at 13:11. Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view